Indian National Congress, byname Congress Party, broadly based political party of India. Formed in 1885, the Indian National Congress dominated the Indian movement for independence from Great Britain. It subsequently formed most of India’s governments from the time of inThe Indian National Congress first convened in December 1885, though the idea of an Indian nationalist movement opposed to British rule dated from the 1850s. During its first several decades, the Congress Party passed fairly moderate reform resolutions, though many within the organization were becoming radicalized by the increased poverty that accompanied British imperialism. In the early 20th century, elements within the party began to endorse a policy of swadeshi (“of our own country”), which called on Indians to boycott of imported British goods and promoted Indian-made goods. By 1917 the group’s “extremist” Home Rule wing, which was formed by Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Annie Besant the previous year, had begun to exert significant influence by appealing to India’s diverse social classes.

In the 1920s and ’30s the Congress Party, led by Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi, began advocating nonviolent noncooperation. The new change in tactics was precipitated by the protest over the perceived feebleness of the constitutional reforms enacted in early 1919 (Rowlatt Acts) and Britain’s manner of carrying them out, as well as by the widespread outrage among Indians in response to the massacre of civilians in Amritsar (Punjab) that April. Many of the acts of civil disobedience that followed were implemented through the All India Congress Committee, formed in 1929, which advocated avoiding taxes as a protest against British rule. Notable in that regard was the Salt March in 1930 led by Gandhi. Another wing of the Congress Party, which believed in working within the existing system, contested general elections in 1923 and 1937 as the Swaraj (Home Rule) Party, with particular success in the latter year, winning 7 out of 11 provinces.

When World War II began in 1939, Britain made India a belligerent without consulting Indian elected councils. That action angered Indian officials and prompted the Congress Party to declare that India would not support the war effort until it had been granted complete independence. In 1942 the organization sponsored mass civil disobedience to support the demand that the British “quit India.” British authorities responded by imprisoning the entire Congress Party leadership, including Gandhi, and many remained in jail until 1945. After the war the British government of Clement Attlee passed an independence bill in July 1947, and independence was achieved the following month. In January 1950 India’s constitution as an independent state took effect.From 1951 until his death in 1964, Jawaharlal Nehru dominated the Congress Party, which won overwhelming victories in the elections of 1951–52, 1957, and 1962. The party united in 1964 to elect Lal Bahadur Shastri and in 1966 Indira Gandhi (Nehru’s daughter) to the posts of party leader and thus prime minister. In 1967, however, Indira Gandhi faced open revolt within the party, and in 1969 she was expelled from the party by a group called the “Syndicate.” Nevertheless, her New Congress Party scored a landslide victory in the 1971 elections, and for a period it was unclear which party was the true rightful heir of the Indian National Congress label.dependence and often had a strong presence in many state governments.
In the mid-1970s the New Congress Party’s popular support began to fracture. From 1975 Gandhi’s government grew increasingly more authoritarian, and unrest among the opposition grew. In the parliamentary elections held in March 1977, the opposition Janata (People’s) Party scored a landslide victory over the Congress Party, winning 295 seats in the Lok Sabha (the lower chamber of India’s parliament) against 153 for the Congress; Gandhi herself lost to her Janata opponent. On January 2, 1978, she and her followers seceded and formed a new opposition party, popularly called Congress (I)—the “I” signifying Indira. Over the next year, her new party attracted enough members of the legislature to become the official opposition, and in 1981 the national election commission declared it the “real” Indian National Congress. In 1996 the “I” designation was dropped. In November 1979 Gandhi regained a parliamentary seat, and the following year she was again elected prime minister. In 1982 her son Rajiv Gandhi became nominal head of the party, and, upon her assassination in October 1984, he became prime minister. In December he led the Congress Party to an overwhelming victory in which it secured 401 seats in the legislature.

Although the Congress Party remained the largest party in parliament in 1989, Rajiv Gandhi was unseated as prime minister by a coalition of opposition parties. While campaigning to regain power in May 1991, he was assassinated by a suicide bomber associated with the Tamil Tigers, a separatist group in Sri Lanka. He was succeeded as party leader by P.V. Narasimha Rao, who was elected prime minister in June 1991.

In contrast to the party’s historical socialist policies, Rao embraced economic liberalization. By 1996 the party’s image was suffering from various reports of corruption, and in elections that year the Congress Party was reduced to 140 seats, its lowest number in the Lok Sabha to that point, becoming parliament’s second largest party. Rao subsequently resigned as prime minister and, in September, as party president. He was succeeded as president by Sitaram Kesri, the party’s first non-Brahman leader.

The United Front (UF) government—a coalition of 13 parties—came to power in 1996 as a minority government with the support of the Congress Party. However, as the largest single party in opposition in parliament after the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP; Indian People’s Party), the Congress Party was vital in both making and defeating the UF. In November 1997 the Congress Party withdrew its support from the UF, prompting elections in February 1998. To boost its popularity among the masses and improve the party’s performance in the forthcoming elections, the Congress Party leaders urged Sonia Gandhi—the Italian-born widow of Rajiv Gandhi—to assume the leadership of the party. She had previously declined overtures to play an active role in party affairs, but at that time she agreed to campaign. Although a BJP-led coalition government came to power, the Congress Party and its partners were able to deny the BJP an absolute majority in the Lok Sabha. The party’s better-than-expected performance in the national elections was attributed by many observers to Sonia Gandhi’s charisma and vigorous campaigning. After the 1998 elections, Kesri resigned as party president, and Sonia Gandhi assumed the leadership of the party.

National parliamentary elections were again held in 1999, when one of the BJP’s major allies, the All India Dravidian Progressive Federation (All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam; AIADMK) party, withdrew its support. Despite aggressive campaigning by its leaders, the Congress Party suffered a worse electoral performance than it had in 1996 and 1998, winning only 114 seats. Nevertheless, in the 2004 national elections the party scored a surprising victory and returned to power. Gandhi, however, declined an invitation to become prime minister and instead supported Manmohan Singh, a former finance minister, who in May 2004 became the country’s first Sikh prime minister. The party again surprised pundits in the 2009 parliamentary elections by increasing its number of seats in the Lok Sabha from 153 to 206, its best showing since 1991.

By the 2014 Lok Sabha polling, however, the party had lost much of its popular support, mainly because of several years of poor economic conditions in the country and growing discontent over a series of corruption scandals involving government officials. The party touted its record at passing legislation aimed at improving the lot of those living in poverty and rural areas, and it fielded Sonia’s son, Rahul Gandhi, to be its candidate for prime minister. However, the BJP and its leading candidate, Narendra Modi, successfully won over the electorate. The results of the elections, announced in mid-May, were an overwhelming electoral victory for the BJP while the Congress Party suffered a stunning loss, securing only 44 seats in the chamber (in 2015 the party won a by-election in Madhya Pradesh, increasing its seat total to 45). It was the party’s worst-ever performance in a national election. One consequence of its poor performance was that it was not able to assume the position of the official opposition party, since it failed to garner the minimum 55 seats (10 percent of the chamber’s total) required for that role. Singh left office on May 26, the day Modi was sworn in as prime minister.

Sonia Gandhi stepped down from leadership in late 2017, and her son Rahul became president of the Congress Party. He faced a number of criticisms, including that he, as the fourth generation of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, was elitist and lacklustre. Within his party he was criticized for his outward display of devotion to Shiva, interpreted as an attempt to tap into the BJP’s appeal to Hindu populism. Some observers, however, believed that Gandhi’s display of Hindu devotion and his efforts to unite rival factions within the party helped the Congress Party outperform the BJP in the 2018 state elections held in the Hindu strongholds of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh. Still, the Congress Party performed only marginally better in the 2019 elections for the Lok Sabha than it did in 2014, prompting Rahul to step down. Sonia was selected to lead the party until a successor could be found.

The Congress Party’s presence at the state level has closely mirrored its performance at the national level. It dominated nearly all state governments in the early years after independence and later began alternating power with other national parties (e.g., the BJP) or with local parties (e.g., the Telugu Desam Party in Andhra Pradesh). By the early 21st century, however, Congress’s influence in state politics had declined to the point where it controlled only a minority of state governments. The party has tended to do better in the northeastern and northern states and poorly in most of the southern states.

The Congress Party is a hierarchically structured party. Delegates from state and district parties attend an annual national conference, which elects a president and the All India Congress Committee. However, the 20-member Congress Working Committee, the majority of whose members are appointed by the party president (handpicked by the prime minister when the party is in power), wields enormous influence. The party is also organized into various committees and sections (e.g., youth and women’s groups), and it publishes a daily newspaper, the National Herald. Mirroring the party’s declining fortunes, the party’s membership dropped from nearly 40 million in the mid-1990s to under 20 million at the beginning of the 21st century.

The party has traditionally supported socialist economic policies within the framework of a mixed economy. In the 1990s, however, it endorsed market reforms, including privatization and the deregulation of the economy. It also has supported secular policies that encourage equal rights for all citizens, including those in lower castes. Throughout much of the Cold War period, the Congress Party championed a foreign policy of nonalignment, which called for India to form ties with both the West and communist countries but to avoid formal alliances with either. Nonetheless, American support for Pakistan led the party to endorse a friendship treaty with the Soviet Union in 1971.The Congress Party’s presence at the state level has closely mirrored its performance at the national level. It dominated nearly all state governments in the early years after independence and later began alternating power with other national parties (e.g., the BJP) or with local parties (e.g., the Telugu Desam Party in Andhra Pradesh). By the early 21st century, however, Congress’s influence in state politics had declined to the point where it controlled only a minority of state governments. The party has tended to do better in the northeastern and northern states and poorly in most of the southern states.

The Congress Party is a hierarchically structured party. Delegates from state and district parties attend an annual national conference, which elects a president and the All India Congress Committee. However, the 20-member Congress Working Committee, the majority of whose members are appointed by the party president (handpicked by the prime minister when the party is in power), wields enormous influence. The party is also organized into various committees and sections (e.g., youth and women’s groups), and it publishes a daily newspaper, the National Herald. Mirroring the party’s declining fortunes, the party’s membership dropped from nearly 40 million in the mid-1990s to under 20 million at the beginning of the 21st century.

The party has traditionally supported socialist economic policies within the framework of a mixed economy. In the 1990s, however, it endorsed market reforms, including privatization and the deregulation of the economy. It also has supported secular policies that encourage equal rights for all citizens, including those in lower castes. Throughout much of the Cold War period, the Congress Party championed a foreign policy of nonalignment, which called for India to form ties with both the West and communist countries but to avoid formal alliances with either. Nonetheless, American support for Pakistan led the party to endorse a friendship treaty with the Soviet Union in 1971.

Inder Kumar Gujral, (born December 4, 1919, Jhelum, India [now in Pakistan]—died November 30, 2012, Gurgaon [now Gurugram], India), Indian politician who served briefly as prime minister of India from April 21, 1997, to March 19, 1998, and who is remembered for the Gujral Doctrine, a policy grounded on India’s unilaterally reaching out diplomatically to its neighbours without the expectation of reciprocity.

Gujral was born into a well-connected family that played a prominent role in the struggle for independence from British rule. He attended DAV College (now Government Islamia College, Civil Lines), the Hailey College of Commerce, and Forman Christian College, all in Lahore. There, during his student days, he was initiated into politics and served as president of the Lahore Students’ Union as well as the general secretary of the Punjab Students’ Federation.

In 1989 Gujral was elected to the Lok Sabha (House of the People, the lower house of the parliament) and became the minister of external affairs (1989–90) in the government of Prime Minister V.P. Singh. In 1992, Gujral again entered the Rajya Sabha. When the Janata Dal-led United Front government came to power in 1996, he was again appointed the minister of external affairs (1996–97). In April 1997, Deve Gowda, the incumbent prime minister, lost a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha by 292 votes to 158. In his place the United Front elected Gujral as leader. With the Congress (I) backing him, Gujral was sworn in as prime minister on April 21. However, in November the Congress (I) party withdrew its support, and Gujral resigned (remaining in a caretaker capacity until a new government could be formed in March 1998). Despite his brief tenure, he made his mark by introducing the Gujral Doctrine, which set the stage for countless negotiations in subsequent years. In 1998 he was elected again to the Lok Sabha.

Varahagiri Venkata Giri, (born Aug. 10, 1894, Berhampore [now Brahmapur], India—died June 24, 1980, Madras [now Chennai]), statesman, president of India from 1969 to 1974.

Giri began his education at Khallikote College, Berhampore, and then went to Dublin to study law. There he became engaged in the Sinn Féin (Irish political party) movement and was expelled from Ireland in 1916. Upon his return to India, he joined the nascent labour movement. He became general secretary and then president of the All-India Railwaymen’s Federation and was twice president of the All-India Trade Union Congress, an organization closely linked with the Indian National Congress (Congress Party).

When the Congress Party formed a government in Madras state (now Tamil Nadu) in 1937, Giri became minister of labour and industries. With the resignation of the Congress governments and the launching of the anti-British “quit India” movement in 1942, he returned to the labour movement and was subsequently imprisoned with his colleagues.

After India became independent, he was appointed high commissioner in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) and in 1952 was elected to the Lok Sabha, one of the two chambers of the Indian Parliament. He was made minister of labour in the central Indian government but resigned in 1954. After this Giri was appointed successively to the largely ceremonial governorships of Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, and Mysore (now Karnataka). In 1967 he was elected vice president of India.

On the death of President Zakir Husain in 1969, Giri became acting president and announced his intention to stand for the presidency. By that time the office, until then largely ceremonial, had become a prize in the developing factional struggle within the Congress Party. The party’s nomination went to another candidate. Indira Gandhi, the prime minister, supported Giri, however, and he was elected by a narrow majority. In 1974 he was succeeded in office by Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed.
Jagjivan Ram, (born April 5, 1908, Chandwa, near Arrah, India—died July 6, 1986, New Delhi), Indian politician, government official, and longtime leading spokesman for the Dalits (formerly untouchables; officially called Scheduled Castes), a low-caste Hindu social class in India. He served in the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) for more than 40 years.

Ram was born into a Dalit family in what is now Bihar state and was among the first of his caste to receive a higher education. He attended Banaras Hindu University in Varanasi and in 1931 earned a bachelor’s degree from the University of Calcutta (now in Kolkata). Also in 1931 he became a member of the Indian National Congress (Congress Party), then led by Mohandas K. Gandhi. Ram played a role in the founding (1935) of the All-India Depressed Classes League, an organization dedicated to attaining equality for Dalits. During the late 1930s he also was elected to a position in the Bihar government and helped organize a rural labour movement.

Ram was jailed twice in the early 1940s for his political activities associated with the Quit India movement against British rule. In 1946 he became the youngest minister in Jawaharlal Nehru’s provisional government and, after independence in 1947, in the country’s national government. He held the labour portfolio until 1952. Thereafter he served in Nehru’s cabinet in the posts of minister for communications (1952–56), transport and railways (1956–62), and transport and communications (1962–63).

Ram supported Indira Gandhi (Nehru’s daughter) in her bid for elected office, and, when in 1966 she succeeded Lal Bahadur Shastri to the office of prime minister, Ram was appointed minister for labour, employment, and rehabilitation (1966–67). He served as minister for food and agriculture (1967–70), and in 1970 he was made minister of defense. During his tenure in that office, India helped to establish the independent state of Bangladesh. From 1974 to 1977 Ram was minister for agriculture and irrigation. He initially supported Prime Minister Gandhi’s declaration of a state of emergency in 1975. By 1977, however, he and several other politicians had resigned from the cabinet and formed the Janata (People’s) Party (JP; a precursor of the Janata Dal), a coalition that successfully opposed Gandhi and the Congress Party that year in elections to the Lok Sabha. Disappointed that he was not chosen prime minister, Ram once again accepted the post of minister of defense (1977–79) in two JP governments. He remained a member of the Lok Sabha until his death.

Bal Gangadhar Tilak, byname Lokamanya, (born July 23, 1856, Ratnagiri [now in Maharashtra state], India—died August 1, 1920, Bombay [now Mumbai]), scholar, mathematician, philosopher, and ardent nationalist who helped lay the foundation for India’s independence by building his own defiance of British rule into a national movement. He founded (1914) and served as president of the Indian Home Rule League. In 1916 he concluded the Lucknow Pact with Mohammed Ali Jinnah, which provided for Hindu-Muslim unity in the nationalist struggle.

Tilak was born into a cultured middle-class Brahman family. Although his birth place was Bombay (Mumbai), he was raised in a village along the Arabian Sea coast in what is now Maharashtra state until the age of 10, when his father, an educator and noted grammarian, took a job in Poona (now Pune). The young Tilak was educated at Deccan College in Poona, where in 1876,he earned bachelor’s degrees in mathematics and Sanskrit. Tilak then studied law, receiving his degree in 1879 from the University of Bombay (now Mumbai). At that point, however, he decided to teach mathematics in a private school in Poona. The school became the basis for his political career. He developed the institution into a university college after founding the Deccan Education Society (1884), which aimed at educating the masses, especially in the English language; he and his associates considered English to be a powerful force for the dissemination of liberal and democratic ideals.

The life members of the society were expected to follow an ideal of selfless service, but when Tilak learned that some members were keeping outside earnings for themselves, he resigned. He then turned to the task of awakening the political consciousness of the people through two weekly newspapers that he owned and edited: Kesari (“The Lion”), published in Marathi, and The Mahratta, published in English. Through those newspapers Tilak became widely known for his bitter criticisms of British rule and of those moderate nationalists who advocated social reforms along Western lines and political reforms along constitutional lines. He thought that social reform would only divert energy away from the political struggle for independence.

Tilak sought to widen the popularity of the nationalist movement (which at that time was largely confined to the upper classes) by introducing Hindu religious symbolism and by invoking popular traditions of the Maratha struggle against Muslim rule. He thus organized two important festivals, Ganesh in 1893 and Shivaji in 1895. Ganesha is the elephant-headed god worshipped by all Hindus, and Shivaji, the first Hindu hero to fight against Muslim power in India, was the founder of the Maratha state in the 17th century, which in the course of time overthrew Muslim power in India. But, though that symbolism made the nationalist movement more popular, it also made it more communal and thus alarmed the Muslims.
Tilak’s activities aroused the Indian populace, but they soon also brought him into conflict with the British government, which prosecuted him for sedition and sent him to jail in 1897. The trial and sentence earned him the title Lokamanya (“Beloved Leader of the People”). He was released after 18 months.

When Lord Curzon, viceroy of India, partitioned Bengal in 1905, Tilak strongly supported the Bengali demand for the annulment of the partition and advocated a boycott of British goods, which soon became a movement that swept the nation. The following year he set forth a program of passive resistance, known as the Tenets of the New Party, that he hoped would destroy the hypnotic influence of British rule and prepare the people for sacrifice in order to gain independence. Those forms of political action initiated by Tilak—the boycotting of goods and passive resistance—were later adopted by Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi in his program of nonviolent noncooperation with the British (satyagraha).

Tilak’s approach was strong fare for the moderate Indian National Congress (Congress Party), which believed in making “loyal” representations to the government for small reforms. Tilak aimed at swarajya (independence), not piecemeal reforms, and attempted to persuade the Congress Party to adopt his militant program. On that issue, he clashed with the moderates during the party’s session (meeting) at Surat (now in Gujarat state) in 1907, and the party split. Taking advantage of the division in the nationalist forces, the government again prosecuted Tilak on a charge of sedition and inciting terrorism and deported him to Mandalay, Burma (Myanmar), to serve a six-year prison sentence.

In the Mandalay jail, Tilak settled down to write his magnum opus, the Śrīmad Bhagavadgitā Rahasya (“Secret of the Bhagavadgita”)—also known as Bhagavad Gita or Gita Rahasya—an original exposition of the most-sacred book of the Hindus. Tilak discarded the orthodox interpretation that the Bhagavadgita (a component of the Mahabharata epic poem) taught the ideal of renunciation; in his view it taught selfless service to humanity. Earlier, in 1893, he had published The Orion; or, Researches into the Antiquity of the Vedas, and, a decade later, The Arctic Home in the Vedas. Both works were intended to promote Hindu culture as the successor to the Vedic religion and his belief that its roots were in the so-called Aryans from the north.

On his release in 1914, on the eve of World War I, Tilak once more plunged into politics. He launched the Home Rule League with the rousing slogan “Swarajya is my birthright and I will have it.” (Activist Annie Besant also established an organization with the same name at about that time.) In 1916 he rejoined the Congress Party and signed the historic Lucknow Pact, a Hindu-Muslim accord, with Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the future founder of Pakistan. Tilak visited England in 1918 as president of the Indian Home Rule League. He realized that the Labour Party was a growing force in British politics, and he established firm relationships with its leaders. His foresight was justified: it was a Labour government that granted independence to India in 1947. Tilak was one of the first to maintain that Indians should cease to cooperate with foreign rule, but he always denied that he had ever encouraged the use of violence.

By the time Tilak returned home in late 1919 to attend the meeting of the Congress Party at Amritsar, he had mellowed sufficiently to oppose Gandhi’s policy of boycotting the elections to the legislative councils established as part of the reforms that followed from the Montagu-Chelmsford Report to Parliament in 1918. Instead, Tilak advised the delegates to follow his policy of “responsive cooperation” in carrying out the reforms, which introduced a certain degree of Indian participation in regional government. He died, however, before he could give the new reforms a decisive direction. In tributes, Gandhi called him “the Maker of Modern India,” and Jawaharlal Nehru, independent India’s first prime minister, described him as “the Father of the Indian Revolution.”

Sir Chettur Sankaran Nair, (born July 11, 1857, Malabar Coast [India]—died April 24, 1934, Madras [now Chennai], India), Indian jurist and statesman who, despite his independent views and outspokenness, attained high government positions rarely open to Indians in his time. He simultaneously opposed the extreme Indian nationalist movement led by Mohandas K. Gandhi and its forcible suppression by the British Indian government.

Sankaran Nair was appointed public prosecutor (1899) and advocate general (1907) for Madras State and a judge of the Madras High Court (1908). In his best-known judgment, he upheld conversion to Hinduism and ruled that such converts were not outcasts. For some years he was a delegate to the Indian National Congress, and he presided at its Amraoti session (1897). He founded and edited the Madras Review and the Madras Law Journal.

Sankaran Nair was knighted in 1912. In 1915 he joined the Viceroy’s Council as member for education. In that office he frequently urged Indian constitutional reforms, and he supported the Montagu-Chelmsford plan (promulgated April 22, 1918), according to which India would gradually achieve self-government within the British Empire. He resigned from the council in 1919 in protest against the protracted use of martial law to quell unrest in the Punjab. Afterward he was a councillor to the secretary of state for India (in London, 1920–21) and a member of the Indian Council of State (from 1925). He also served as chairman of the All-India Committee, which in 1928–29 rather ineffectually met with the Simon Commission (Indian Statutory Commission, comprising British politicians) concerning Indian constitutional problems.

In his book Gandhi and Anarchy (1922), Sankaran Nair attacked Gandhi’s nationalist noncooperation movement and British actions under martial law. A British court held that this work libelled Sir Michael Francis O’Dwyer, lieutenant governor of India during the Punjab rebellion of 1919.

Manmohan Singh, (born September 26, 1932, Gah, West Punjab, India [now in Pakistan]), Indian economist and politician, who served as prime minister of India from 2004 to 2014. A Sikh, he was the first non-Hindu to occupy the office.

Singh attended Panjab University in Chandigarh and the University of Cambridge in Great Britain. He later earned a doctorate in economics from the University of Oxford. In the 1970s he was named to a series of economic advisory posts with the Indian government and became a frequent consultant to prime ministers. Singh also worked at the Reserve Bank of India, serving as director (1976–80) and governor (1982–85). When he was named finance minister in 1991, the country was on the verge of an economic collapse. Singh devalued the rupee, lowered taxes, privatized state-run industries, and encouraged foreign investment, reforms that helped transform the country’s economy and spark an economic boom. A member of the Indian National Congress, he joined the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of Parliament) in 1991. Singh, who served as finance minister until 1996, ran for the Lok Sabha (lower chamber) in 1999 but was defeated.
Congress won the May 2004 parliamentary elections, defeating the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Congress’s leader, Sonia Gandhi (widow of former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi), declined the prime ministership, instead recommending Singh for the post. Singh subsequently formed a government and took office. His stated goals included helping improve conditions for India’s poor (who generally had not benefited from the country’s economic growth), securing peace with neighbouring Pakistan, and improving relations between India’s various religious groups.

Singh presided over a rapidly expanding economy, but rising fuel costs precipitated a marked increase in inflation that threatened the government’s ability to provide subsidies for the country’s poor. In an effort to meet India’s growing energy demands, Singh in 2005 entered into negotiations with U.S. President George W. Bush for a nuclear cooperation pact. The deal called for India to receive fuel technology for nuclear plants and be given the ability to purchase nuclear fuel on the world market. Abroad, the prospective cooperation agreement was resisted by those who were upset over India’s refusal to sign the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; in India, Singh was criticized for fostering too close a relationship with the United States, which, his critics believed, would use the deal to leverage power in the Indian government. By 2008 progress on the deal prompted members of the government’s Parliamentary majority—communist parties in particular—to denounce Singh’s government and ultimately push for a confidence vote in Parliament in late July 2008. Singh’s government narrowly survived the vote, but the process was marred by allegations—on both sides—of corruption and the purchasing of votes.
In the parliamentary elections of May 2009, Congress increased its number of seats in the legislature, and Singh took office as prime minister for a second time. A slowing of India’s economic growth and further allegations of corruption against Congress Party officials hampered governance during Singh’s second term, however, and led to a deterioration of the party’s popularity with the voting population. In early 2014 Singh announced that he would not seek a third term as prime minister in the elections to the Lok Sabha that spring. He left office on May 26, the same day that Narendra Modi of the BJP was sworn in as prime minister.

Lucknow Pact, (December 1916), agreement made by the Indian National Congress headed by Maratha leader Bal Gangadhar Tilak and the All-India Muslim League led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah; it was adopted by the Congress at its Lucknow session on December 29 and by the league on Dec. 31, 1916. The meeting at Lucknow marked the reunion of the moderate and radical wings of the Congress. The pact dealt both with the structure of the government of India and with the relation of the Hindu and Muslim communities.

On the former count, the proposals were an advance on Gopal Krishna Gokhale’s “political testament.” Four-fifths of the provincial and central legislatures were to be elected on a broad franchise, and half the executive council members, including those of the central executive council, were to be Indians elected by the councils themselves. Except for the provision for the central executive, these proposals were largely embodied in the Government of India Act of 1919. The Congress also agreed to separate electorates for Muslims in provincial council elections and for weightage in their favour (beyond the proportions indicated by population) in all provinces except the Punjab and Bengal, where they gave some ground to the Hindu and Sikh minorities. This pact paved the way for Hindu-Muslim cooperation in the Khilafat movement and Mohandas Gandhi’s noncooperation movement from 1920.

Chitta Ranjan Das, (born Nov. 5, 1870, Calcutta [now Kolkata], India—died June 16, 1925, Darjeeling [now Darjiling]), politician and leader of the Swaraj (Independence) Party in Bengal under British rule.

After failing the competitive entrance examination for the British-dominated Indian Civil Service, Das entered the legal profession. He defended many accused of political offenses and took an active part in nationalistic journalism.

Bitterly opposing British rule in India and rejecting all ideas of political or economic development of India along Western lines, he idealized the life of the ancient Indian village and saw a golden age in ancient Indian history. He supported the noncooperation movement launched against British rule by Mahatma Gandhi and in 1921 was imprisoned for six months as a political offender. In 1922 he became president of the Indian National Congress. Under his leadership the Congress abandoned its intentions to boycott colonially sponsored elections for provincial councils. It decided instead to participate in order to seek positions that would permit them to obstruct governmental business from within.

Later, when the Swarajists were returned as the largest party in Bengal, Das declined the post of chief minister, stating that his aim was to wreck the existing government, not to cooperate with it. In 1924 he was elected mayor of Calcutta (now Kolkata) and tried to improve the lot of the city’s neglected Indian population. In 1925 there were some signs of a possible compromise between Das and Lord Birkenhead, the secretary of state for India, but Das died before any agreement could be reached.
Jivatram Bhagwandas Kripalani, also called Acharya Kripalani, (born November 11, 1888, Hyderabad, India [now in Pakistan]—died March 19, 1982, Ahmadabad), prominent Indian educator, social activist, and politician in both pre- and post-independence India, who was a close associate of Mohandas K. Gandhi and a longtime supporter of his ideology. He was a leading figure in the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) during the 1930s and ’40s and later was a founder of the Praja Socialist Party (PSP).

Kripalani was born in Hyderabad (now in Sindh province, Pakistan) and was raised in the Sindh and Gujarat regions in a middle-class Hindu family. His father was a minor government official. He earned a master’s degree in history and economics from Fergusson College in Pune. In 1912 he embarked on a teaching career.

As a student, Kripalani had participated in social and political activism. It was during his time as a teacher that he first encountered Gandhi, and he was associated with Gandhi by 1917, after Gandhi had taken up the cause of indigo workers in Gujarat. Kripalani subsequently joined the Congress Party and worked on Gandhi’s ashrams (religious retreats) in Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Bihar. From 1922 to 1927 he was the principal of Gujarat Vidyapith in Ahmadabad, a school founded by Gandhi, and it was during his tenure there that he acquired the nickname Acharya (“Teacher”). After 1920 Kripalani also participated in many of the acts of civil disobedience associated with Indian opposition to British rule, in the process earning several prison terms.

Kripalani rose to become a senior leader within Congress. His first major post was as general secretary of the All India Congress Committee in 1928–29, and from 1934 to 1945 he served as general secretary of the party. In 1946 he was elected president of the party, but his tenure in that post was controversial. Jawaharlal Nehru, independent India’s first prime minister, objected to the high level of involvement that Kripalani wanted the party to play in governing the country. In My Times, his autobiography published posthumously in 2004, Kripalani strongly condemned nearly the entire Congress leadership—Gandhi being one of the few exceptions—for allowing a united India to be partitioned in 1947. Late that year he resigned as party president..

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
While that drama was unfolding, he was a member (1946–47) of India’s interim government and (1946–51) of the Constituent Assembly that drafted the country’s new constitution.. In 1951 Kripalani resigned from Congress, a year after he was defeated in a bid to become president of the party again, and he helped form the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party that in 1952 became the core of the Praja Socialist Party (PSP); he later resigned from the PSP. Also in 1951 he was elected to the Lok Sabha (the lower chamber of the Indian parliament) and won reelection to that chamber in 1957, 1963, and 1967. His only electoral defeats came in 1962, when he lost his seat to V.K. Krishna Menon (then minister of defense), and in 1971, his last bid for public office.

Kripalani was an avowed follower of Gandhi. After Gandhi’s assassination in 1948, he took upon himself the task of standard bearer for Gandhian principles in a world he thought was losing respect for idealism. Kripalani later included in his autobiography this passage that he had once written to Gandhi, “I cannot live in the light of the doctrines I have learnt from you. But intellectually I am convinced that humanity’s salvation lies that way.” He long championed social and environmental causes and became a spiritual leader of the socialists in India.

Kripalani was a harsh critic of both Nehru and Nehru’s daughter, Indira Gandhi. He opposed Nehru’s policies, which he thought went against the Gandhian ideal of village republics, and he strongly denounced Indira Gandhi’s authoritarian rule as prime minister. In 1972–73 he, Jaya Prakash (or Jayaprakash) Narayan, and other socialist leaders toured the country urging nonviolent protest and civil disobedience against Indira Gandhi’s government. Kripalani was among the first lot of political leaders to be arrested in June 1975 after she had imposed a nationwide state of emergency, but because of his prominence he was only briefly held in custody. Kripalani was the author of several books, including Gandhi: His Life and Thought (1970).

The Indian National Congress (often called the Congress Party or simply Congress, abbr. INC) is a political party in India with widespread roots.[23] Founded in 1885, it was the first modern nationalist movement to emerge in the British Empire in Asia and Africa.[a][24] From the late 19th century, and especially after 1920, under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, Congress became the principal leader of the Indian independence movement.[25] Congress led India to independence from the United Kingdom,[d] and powerfully influenced other anti-colonial nationalist movements in the British Empire.[e][24]

The Congress today is one of the two major political parties in India, along with its main rival the Bharatiya Janata Party.[28] It is a "big tent" party whose platform is generally considered in the centre to centre-left, in its ideological orientation, of Indian politics.[29][11][16] On social issues, it advocates secular policies that encourage equal opportunity, right to health, civil liberty and welfare of weaker sections and minorities, with support for a mixed economy.[30] As of 2021, in the 17 general elections since independence, it has won an outright majority on seven occasions and has led the ruling coalition a further three times, heading the central government for more than 54 years. There have been six Congress Prime Ministers, the first being Jawaharlal Nehru (1947–1964), and the most recent Manmohan Singh (2004–2014).

After Indian independence, the Congress emerged as a catch-all party under Nehru, dominating Indian politics for the next 20 years. During this time, the Congress generally advocated socialist policies, and established a secular state. After Nehru's death and the short tenure of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Indira Gandhi became the leader of the party. During her tenure, the Congress shifted to the left.

In 1969, the party suffered a major split, with a faction led by Indira Gandhi leaving to form the Congress (R), leaving the remainder as the Congress (O). The Congress (R) became the dominant faction, winning a strong victory in the 1971 Indian general election. However, backlash against the Emergency and the uniting of several opposition parties into the Janata Party led to the Congress being defeated in the 1977 Indian general election. Another split occurred in 1979, leading to the creation of the Congress (I), which was recognised as the Congress by the Electoral Commission in 1981.

In 1984, Indira Gandhi was assassinated, and was succeeded as president by her son, Rajiv Gandhi. Under his leadership, the party won a massive victory in 1984, but lost power in 1989 to the National Front under V. P. Singh. The Congress then returned to power under P. V. Narasimha Rao, who moved the party towards an economically liberal agenda, a sharp break from previous leaders. However, it lost the 1996 general election, and was replaced in government by the National Front and then the Bharatiya Janata Party.

The Congress party won the 2004 general elections and returned to power after a record eight years out of office. The Congress-led coalition known as the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) under Manmohan Singh formed a government. Subsequently, the UPA again formed the government after winning the 2009 general elections, and Singh became the first Prime Minister since Nehru in 1962 to be re-elected after completing a full five-year term. However, in the 2014 general election, the Congress suffered a heavy defeat winning only 48 seats of the 543-member Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Parliament of India). As of June 2021, the party with its alliances is in power in six legislative assemblies.

A total of 61 people have served as the president of the INC since its formation. Sonia Gandhi is the longest serving president of the party, having held the office for over twenty years from 1998 to 2017 and since 2019. The district party is the smallest functional unit of the Congress. There is also a Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC), present at the state-level in every state. Together, the delegates from the districts and PCCs form the All India Congress Committee (AICC). The party is also organized into several committees, and sections.

The Indian National Congress conducted its first session in Bombay from 28 to 31 December 1885 at the initiative of retired Civil Service officer Allan Octavian Hume. In 1883, Hume had outlined his idea for a body representing Indian interests in an open letter to graduates of the University of Calcutta.[31][32] Its aim was to obtain a greater share in government for educated Indians, and to create a platform for civic and political dialogue between them and the British Raj. Hume took the initiative, and in March 1885 a notice convening the first meeting of the Indian National Union to be held in Poona the following December was issued.[33] Due to a cholera outbreak there, it was moved to Bombay.[34][35]

Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee, The First president of Indian National Congress
Hume organised the first meeting in Bombay with the approval of the Viceroy Lord Dufferin. Umesh Chandra Banerjee was the first president of Congress; the first session was attended by 72 delegates, representing each province of India.[36][37] Notable representatives included Scottish ICS officer William Wedderburn, Dadabhai Naoroji, Pherozeshah Mehta of the Bombay Presidency Association, Ganesh Vasudeo Joshi of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, social reformer and newspaper editor Gopal Ganesh Agarkar, Justice K. T. Telang, N. G. Chandavarkar, Dinshaw Wacha, Behramji Malabari, journalist and activist Gooty Kesava Pillai, and P. Rangaiah Naidu of the Madras Mahajana Sabha.[38][39] This small elite group, unrepresentative of the Indian masses at the time,[40] functioned more as a stage for elite Indian ambitions than a political party for the first decade of its existence.[41]

Congress "extremist" Bal Gangadhar Tilak speaking in 1907 as the Party split into moderates and extremists. Seated at the table is Aurobindo Ghosh and to his right (in the chair) is G. S. Khaparde, both allies of Tilak.

Gopal Krishna Gokhale, a constitutional social reformer and moderate nationalist, was elected president of the Indian National Congress in 1905.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Congress' demands became more radical in the face of constant opposition from the British government, and the party decided to advocate in favour of the independence movement because it would allow a new political system in which Congress could be a major party. By 1905, a division opened between the moderates led by Gokhale, who downplayed public agitation, and the new extremists who advocated agitation, and regarded the pursuit of social reform as a distraction from nationalism. Bal Gangadhar Tilak, who tried to mobilise Hindu Indians by appealing to an explicitly Hindu political identity displayed in the annual public Ganapati festivals he inaugurated in western India, was prominent among the extremists.[42]

Congress included a number of prominent political figures. Dadabhai Naoroji, a member of the sister Indian National Association, was elected president of the party in 1886 and was the first Indian Member of Parliament in the British House of Commons (1892–1895). Congress also included Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, Lala Lajpat Rai, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, and Mohammed Ali Jinnah. Jinnah was a member of the moderate group in the Congress, favouring Hindu–Muslim unity in achieving self-government.[43] Later he became the leader of the Muslim League and instrumental in the creation of Pakistan. Congress was transformed into a mass movement by Surendranath Banerjee during the partition of Bengal in 1905, and the resultant Swadeshi movement.[39]

Congress as a mass movement
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born to a Hindu family on 2nd October 1869, in Porbandar, Gujarat, India
Mahatma Gandhi spinning yarn, in the late 1920s
Mahatma Gandhi returned from South Africa in 1915.[44] After the First World War, the party became associated with Gandhi, who remained its unofficial spiritual leader and icon.[45] He formed an alliance with the Khilafat Movement in 1920 to fight for preservation of the Ottoman Caliphate, and rights for Indians using civil disobedience or satyagraha as the tool for agitation.[46] In 1923, after the deaths of policemen at Chauri Chaura, Gandhi suspended the agitation. In protest, a number of leaders, Chittaranjan Das, Annie Besant, and Motilal Nehru, resigned to set up the Swaraj Party. The Khilafat movement collapsed and Congress was split.[47]

With the help of the moderate group led by Gokhale, in 1924 Gandhi became president of Congress.[48][49] The rise of Gandhi's popularity and his satyagraha art of revolution led to support from Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajendra Prasad, Khan Mohammad Abbas Khan, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Chakravarti Rajgopalachari, Anugrah Narayan Sinha, Jayaprakash Narayan, Jivatram Kripalani, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. As a result of prevailing nationalism, Gandhi's popularity, and the party's attempts at eradicating caste differences, untouchability, poverty, and religious and ethnic divisions, Congress became a forceful and dominant group.[50][51][52] Although its members were predominantly Hindu, it had members from other religions, economic classes, and ethnic and linguistic groups.[citation needed]

At the Congress 1929 Lahore session under the presidency of Jawaharlal Nehru, Purna Swaraj (complete independence) was declared as the party's goal, declaring 26 January 1930 as "Purna Swaraj Diwas" (Independence Day).[53] The same year, Srinivas Iyenger was expelled from the party for demanding full independence, not just home rule as demanded by Gandhi

After the passage of the Government of India Act 1935, provincial elections were held in India in the winter of 1936–37 in eleven provinces: Madras, Central Provinces, Bihar, Orissa, United Provinces, Bombay Presidency, Assam, NWFP, Bengal, Punjab, and Sindh. The final results of the elections were declared in February 1937.[55] The Indian National Congress gained power in eight of them - the three exceptions being Bengal, Punjab, and Sindh.[55] The All-India Muslim League failed to form a government in any province.[56] Congress ministries resigned in October and November 1939 in protest against Viceroy Lord Linlithgow's declaration that India was a belligerent in the Second World War without consulting the Indian people.[57]

In 1939, Subhas Chandra Bose, the elected president in both 1938 and 1939, resigned from Congress over the selection of the working committee.[58] Congress was an umbrella organisation, sheltering radical socialists, traditionalists, and Hindu and Muslim conservatives. Gandhi expelled all the socialist groupings, including the Congress Socialist Party, the Krishak Praja Party, and the Swarajya Party, along with Subhas Chandra Bose, in 1939.[45]

Azad, Patel and Gandhi at an AICC meeting in Bombay, 1940
In 1946, the British tried the Indian soldiers who had fought alongside the Japanese during World War II in the INA trials. In response, Congress helped form the INA Defence Committee, which assembled a legal team to defend the case of the soldiers of the Azad Hind government. The team included several famous lawyers, including Bhulabhai Desai, Asaf Ali, and Jawaharlal Nehru.[59] The same year, Congress members initially supported the sailors who led the Royal Indian Navy mutiny, but they withdrew support at a critical juncture and the mutiny failed.[60][61]
After Indian independence in 1947, the Indian National Congress became the dominant political party in the country. In 1952, in the first general election held after Independence, the party swept to power in the national parliament and most state legislatures. It held power nationally until 1977, when it was defeated by the Janata coalition. It returned to power in 1980 and ruled until 1989, when it was once again defeated. The party formed the government in 1991 at the head of a coalition, as well as in 2004 and 2009, when it led the United Progressive Alliance. During this period the Congress remained centre-left in its social policies while steadily shifting from a socialist to a neoliberal economic outlook.[62] The Party's rivals at state level have been national parties including the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPIM), and various regional parties, such as the Telugu Desam Party, Trinamool Congress and Aam Aadmi Party.[63]

A post-partition successor to the party survived as the Pakistan National Congress, a party which represented the rights of religious minorities in the state. The party's support was strongest in the Bengali-speaking province of East Pakistan. After the Bangladeshi War of Independence, it became known as the Bangladeshi National Congress, but was dissolved in 1975 by the government.[64][65][66]

Longest serving PM in India
Jawaharlal Nehru served as the first Prime Minister of India. (1947–64)

Lal Bahadur Shastri, Prime Minister of India (1964-66)
From 1951 until his death in 1964, Jawaharlal Nehru was the paramount leader of the party. Congress gained power in landslide victories in the general elections of 1951–52, 1957, and 1962.[67] During his tenure, Nehru implemented policies based on import substitution industrialisation, and advocated a mixed economy where the government-controlled public sector co-existed with the private sector.[68] He believed the establishment of basic and heavy industries was fundamental to the development and modernisation of the Indian economy.[67] The Nehru government directed investment primarily into key public sector industries—steel, iron, coal, and power—promoting their development with subsidies and protectionist policies.[68] Nehru embraced secularism, socialistic economic practices based on state-driven industrialisation, and a non-aligned and non-confrontational foreign policy that became typical of the modern Congress Party.[69] The policy of non-alignment during the Cold War meant Nehru received financial and technical support from both the Eastern and Western Blocs to build India's industrial base from nothing.[70][71]

During his period in office, there were four known assassination attempts on Nehru.[72] The first attempt on his life was during partition in 1947 while he was visiting the North-West Frontier Province in a car. The second was by a knife-wielding rickshaw-puller in Maharashtra in 1955.[73] A third attempt happened in Bombay in 1956.[74] The fourth was a failed bombing attempt on railway tracks in Maharashtra in 1961.[72] Despite threats to his life, Nehru despised having excess security personnel around him and did not like his movements to disrupt traffic.[72]

K. Kamaraj became the president of the All India Congress Committee in 1963 during the last year of Nehru's life.[75] Prior to that, he had been the chief minister of Madras state for nine years.[76] Kamraj had also been a member of "the syndicate", a group of right wing leaders within Congress. In 1963 the Congress lost popularity following the defeat in the Indo-Chinese war of 1962. To revitalize the party, Kamraj proposed the Kamaraj Plan to Nehru that encouraged six Congress chief ministers (including himself) and six senior cabinet ministers to resign to take up party work.[77][78][79]

In 1964, Nehru died because of an aortic dissection, raising questions about the party's future.[80][81][82] Following the death of Nehru, Gulzarilal Nanda was appointed as the interim Prime Minister on May 27, 1964, pending the election of a new parliamentary leader of the Congress party who would then become Prime Minister.[83]During the leadership contest to succeed Nehru, Kamaraj was widely credited as the "kingmaker" in for ensuring the victory of Lal Bahadur Shastri over Morarji Desai .[84]

As prime minister, Shastri retained many members of Nehru's Council of Ministers; T. T. Krishnamachari was retained as Finance Minister of India, as was Defence Minister Yashwantrao Chavan.[85] Shastri appointed Swaran Singh to succeed him as External Affairs Minister.[86] Shashtri appointed Indira Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru's daughter and former party president, Minister of Information and Broadcasting.[87] Gulzarilal Nanda continued as the Minister of Home Affairs.[88] As Prime Minister, Shastri continued Nehru's policy of non-alignment,[89] but built closer relations with the Soviet Union. In the aftermath of the Sino-Indian War of 1962, and the formation of military ties between China and Pakistan, Shastri's government expanded the defence budget of India's armed forces. He also promoted the White Revolution—a national campaign to increase the production and supply of milk by creating the National Dairy Development Board.[90] The Madras anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 occurred during Shastri's tenure.[91][92]

Shastri became a national hero following victory in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965.[93] His slogan, "Jai Jawan Jai Kisan" ("Hail the soldier, Hail the farmer"), became very popular during the war.[94] On 11 January 1966, a day after signing the Tashkent Declaration, Shastri died in Tashkent, reportedly of a heart attack; but the circumstances of his death remain mysterious

After Shastri's death, Congress elected Indira Gandhi as leader over Morarji Desai. Once again, K. Kamaraj was instrumental in achieving this result.

Already after Nehru's death in 1964, the congress party had started to face internal crisis. There were differences among the top leadership of the Congress regarding the future of the party. These differences during earlier years of Indira Gandhi's rule resulted in the formation of many breakaway parties such as Orissa Jana Congress, Bangla Congress, Utkal Congress, and, Bharatiya Kranti Dal.Kerala Congress,however, was formed in 1964 before Gandhi became leader.

In 1967, following a poor performance in the general election, Indira Gandhi started moving towards the political left. In mid-1969, she was involved in a dispute with senior party leaders on a number of issues. The two major issues were Gandhi supporting the independent candidate, V. V. Giri, rather than the official Congress party candidate, Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, for the vacant post of the President of India.[98][99] The second issue was Mrs. Gandhi's abrupt nationalization of the 14 biggest banks in India, which resulted in the resignation of the finance minister, Morarji Desai. Later in the year, the Congress party president, S. Nijalingappa, expelled her from the party for indiscipline.[100][101] Mrs. Gandhi as a counter-move launched her own faction of the INC. It was also known as Congress (R) R stood for Requisition or Ruling. The original party then came to be known as Indian National Congress (O). The "O" stands for organisation/Old Congress. The principal leaders of the Indian National Congress (O) were Kamraj, Morarji Desai, Nijalingappa and S. K. Patil who stood for a more right-wing agenda.[102] Indira Gandhi, on the other hand, wanted to use a populist agenda in order to mobilize popular support for the party.[102] Mrs. Gandhi's faction, called Congress (R), was supported by most of the Congress MPs while the original party had the support of only 65 MPs.[103]It soon came to be known as the New Congress. In the All India Congress Committee, 446 of its 705 members walked over to Indira's side. This created a belief among Indians that Indira's Congress was the Real Congress (INC-R). After the separation of the two parties, there was also a dispute about the party logo. The "Old Congress" retained the party symbol of a pair of bullocks carrying a yoke while Indira's breakaway faction was given a new symbol of a cow with a suckling calf by the Election Commission as the party election symbol. The split occurred when, in 1969, a united opposition under the banner of Samyukt Vidhayak Dal, won control over several states in the Hindi Belt.[104]

In the mid-term parliamentary elections held in 1971, the Gandhi-led Congress (R) Party won a landslide victory on a platform of progressive policies such as the elimination of poverty (Garibi Hatao).[105] The policies of the Congress (R) Party under Gandhi before the 1971 elections included proposals to abolish the Privy Purse to former rulers of the Princely states, and the 1969 nationalisation of India's 14 largest banks.[106]

The New Congress Party's popular support began to wane in the mid-1970s. From 1975, Gandhi's government grew increasingly more authoritarian and unrest among the opposition grew. On 12 June 1975, the High Court of Allahabad declared Indira Gandhi's election to the Lok Sabha, the lower house of India's parliament, void on the grounds of electoral malpractice.[107] However, Gandhi rejected calls to resign and announced plans to appeal to the Supreme Court. She moved to restore order by ordering the arrest of most of the opposition participating in the unrest. In response to increasing disorder and lawlessness, Gandhi's cabinet and government recommended that President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed declare a State of Emergency, which he did on 25 June 1975 based on the provisions of Article 352 of the Constitution.[108]

Sanjay Gandhi, younger son and advisor of Indira Gandhi who wielded power over the party in the second half of the 1970s including during the Emergency
During the nineteen-month emergency, widespread oppression and abuse of power by Gandhi's unelected younger son and political heir Sanjay Gandhi and his close associates occurred.[109][110][111] This period of oppression ended on 23 January 1977, when Gandhi released all political prisoners and called fresh elections for the Lok Sabha to be held in March.[112] The Emergency officially ended on 23 March 1977.[113] In that month's parliamentary elections, the Janata alliance of anti-Indira opposition parties won a landslide victory over Congress, winning 295 seats in the Lok Sabha against Congress' 153. Gandhi lost her seat to her Janata opponent Raj Narain. On 2 January 1978, she and her followers seceded and formed a new opposition party, popularly called Congress (I)—the "I" signifying Indira. During the next year, her new party attracted enough members of the legislature to become the official opposition.[114] In November 1978, Gandhi regained a parliamentary seat. In January 1980, following a landslide victory for Congress (I), she was again elected prime minister.[115] The national election commission declared Congress (I) to be the real Indian National Congress for the 1984 general election. However, the designation I was dropped only in 1996.[116][117]

Early during Gandhi's new term as prime minister, her youngest son Sanjay died in an aeroplane crash in June 1980.[118][119] This led her to encourage her elder son Rajiv, who was working as an airline pilot, to enter politics. Gradually, Indira Gandhi's politics and outlook grew more authoritarian and autocratic, and she became the central figure within the Congress Party. As prime minister, she became known for her political ruthlessness and unprecedented centralization of power.[120]

Gandhi's term as prime minister also saw increasing turmoil in Punjab, with demands for Sikh autonomy by Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale and his militant followers.[121] In 1983, they headquartered themselves in the Golden Temple in Amritsar and started accumulating weapons.[122] In June 1984, after several futile negotiations, Gandhi ordered the Indian Army to enter the Golden Temple to establish control over the complex and remove Bhindranwale and his armed followers. This event is known as Operation Blue Star.[123] On 31 October 1984, two of Gandhi's bodyguards, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh, shot her with their service weapons in the garden of the prime minister's residence in response to her authorisation of Operation Blue Star.[122] Gandhi was due to be interviewed by British actor Peter Ustinov, who was filming a documentary for Irish television.[124] Her assassination prompted the 1984 anti-Sikh riots, during which more than 3,000 people were killed.

In 1984, Indira Gandhi's son Rajiv Gandhi became nominal head of Congress, and went on to become prime minister upon her assassination.[126] In December, he led Congress to a landslide victory, where it secured 401 seats in the legislature.[127] His administration took measures to reform the government bureaucracy and liberalise the country's economy.[128] Rajiv Gandhi's attempts to discourage separatist movements in Punjab and Kashmir backfired. After his government became embroiled in several financial scandals, his leadership became increasingly ineffectual.[129] Gandhi was regarded as a non-abrasive person who consulted other party members and refrained from hasty decisions.[130] The Bofors scandal damaged his reputation as an honest politician, but he was posthumously cleared of bribery allegations in 2004.[131] On 21 May 1991, Gandhi was killed by a bomb concealed in a basket of flowers carried by a woman associated with the Tamil Tigers.[132] He was campaigning in Tamil Nadu for upcoming parliamentary elections. In 1998, an Indian court convicted 26 people in the conspiracy to assassinate Gandhi.[133] The conspirators, who consisted of Tamil militants from Sri Lanka and their Indian allies, had sought revenge against Gandhi because the Indian troops he sent to Sri Lanka in 1987 to help enforce a peace accord there had fought with Tamil Militant guerrillas.[134][135]

P. V. Narasimha Rao, Prime minister of India (1991-96) and President of INC who ushered in the era of Economic liberalisation in India.
Rajiv Gandhi was succeeded as party leader by P. V. Narasimha Rao, who was elected prime minister in June 1991.[136] His rise to the prime ministership was politically significant because he was the first holder of the office from South India. His administration oversaw major economic change and experienced several home incidents that affected India's national security.[137] Rao, who held the Industries portfolio, was personally responsible for the dismantling of the Licence Raj, which came under the purview of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.[138] He is often called the "father of Indian economic reforms".[139][140]

Future prime ministers Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Manmohan Singh continued the economic reform policies begun by Rao's government. Rao accelerated the dismantling of the Licence Raj, reversing the socialist policies of previous governments.[141][142] He employed Manmohan Singh as his finance minister to begin a historic economic change. With Rao's mandate, Singh launched India's globalisation reforms that involved implementing International Monetary Fund (IMF) policies to prevent India's impending economic collapse.[138] Rao was also referred to as Chanakya for his ability to push tough economic and political legislation through the parliament while he headed a minority government.[143][144]

By 1996, the party's image was suffering from allegations of corruption, and in elections that year, Congress was reduced to 140 seats, its lowest number in the Lok Sabha to that point. Rao later resigned as prime minister and, in September, as party president.[145] He was succeeded as president by Sitaram Kesri, the party's first non-Brahmin leader.[146] During the tenure of both Rao and Kesri, the two leaders conducted internal elections to the Congress working committees and their own posts as party presidents

The 1998 general election saw Congress win 141 seats in the Lok Sabha, its lowest tally until then.[148] To boost its popularity and improve its performance in the forthcoming election, Congress leaders urged Sonia Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi's widow, to assume leadership of the party.[149] She had previously declined offers to become actively involved in party affairs and had stayed away from politics.[150] After her election as party leader, a section of the party that objected to the choice because of her Italian ethnicity broke away and formed the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), led by Sharad Pawar.[151]

The first and only Sikh in Prime Minister's office
Manmohan Singh served as the 13th Prime Minister of India between 2004 and 2014.
Sonia Gandhi struggled to revive the party in her early years as its president; she was under continuous scrutiny for her foreign birth and lack of political acumen. In the snap elections called by the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government in 1999, Congress' tally further plummeted to just 114 seats.[152] Although the leadership structure was unaltered as the party campaigned strongly in the assembly elections that followed, Gandhi began to make such strategic changes as abandoning the party's 1998 Pachmarhi resolution of ekla chalo, or "go it alone" policy, and formed alliances with other like-minded parties. In the intervening years, the party was successful at various legislative assembly elections; at one point, Congress ruled 15 states.[153] For the 2004 general election, Congress forged alliances with regional parties including the NCP and the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.[154] The party's campaign emphasised social inclusion and the welfare of the common masses—an ideology that Gandhi herself endorsed for Congress during her presidency—with slogans such as Congress ka haath, aam aadmi ke saath ("Congress hand in hand with the common man"), contrasting with the NDA's "India Shining" campaign.[152][155][156][157][158] The Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) won 222 seats in the new parliament, defeating the NDA by a substantial margin. With the subsequent support of the communist front, Congress won a majority and formed a new government. Despite massive support from within the party, Gandhi declined the post of prime minister, choosing to appoint Manmohan Singh instead. She remained as party president and headed the National Advisory Council (NAC).[159]

During its first term in office, the UPA government passed several social reform bills. These included an employment guarantee bill, the Right to Information Act, and a right to education act. The NAC, as well as the Left Front that supported the government from the outside, were widely seen as being the driving force behind such legislation. The Left Front withdrew its support of the government over disagreements about the U.S.–India Civil Nuclear Agreement. Despite the effective loss of 62 seats in parliament, the government survived the trust vote that followed.[160] In the Lok Sabha elections held soon after, Congress won 207 seats, the highest tally of any party since 1991. The UPA as a whole won 262, enabling it to form a government for the second time. The social welfare policies of the first UPA government, and the perceived divisiveness of the BJP, are broadly credited with the victory.[161]

By the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, the party had lost much of its popular support, mainly because of several years of poor economic conditions in the country, and growing discontent over a series of corruption allegations involving government officials, including the 2G spectrum case and the Indian coal allocation scam.[162][163] Congress won only 44 seats in the Lok Sabha, compared to the 336 of the BJP and its allies[164] The UPA suffered heavy defeat, which was its worst-ever performance in a national election with its vote share dipping below 20% for the first time.[165] Narendra Modi succeeded Singh as Prime Minister as the head of the National Democratic Alliance. Sonia Gandhi retired as party president in December 2017, having served for a record nineteen years. She was succeeded by her son Rahul Gandhi, who was elected unopposed in the 2017 Indian National Congress presidential election.[157]

Rahul Gandhi resigned from his post after the 2019 Indian general election, due to the party's dismal performance. The INC had managed to win only 52 seats, hence failing to provide an official Leader of the Opposition for a second consecutive term.[166] Following Gandhi's resignation, party leaders began deliberations for a suitable candidate to replace him. The Congress Working Committee met on 10 August to make a final decision on the matter and passed a resolution asking Sonia Gandhi to take over as interim president until a consensus candidate could be picked

The history of the economic policy of Congress-led governments can be divided into two periods. The first period lasted from independence, in 1947, to 1991 and put great emphasis on the public sector.[188] The second period began with economic liberalization in 1991. At present, the Congress endorses a mixed economy in which the private sector and the state both direct the economy, which has characteristics of both market and planned economies. The Congress advocates import substitution industrialisation—the replacement of foreign imports with domestic product, and believes the Indian economy should be liberalised to increase the pace of development.[189][190]
Then-Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee during the World Economic Summit 2009 in New Delhi
At the beginning of the first period, the Congress prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru implemented policies based on import substitution industrialization and advocated a mixed economy where the government-controlled public sector would co-exist with the private sector.[191] He believed that the establishment of basic and heavy industry was fundamental to the development and modernisation of the Indian economy. The government, therefore, directed investment primarily into key public-sector industries—steel, iron, coal, and power—promoting their development with subsidies and protectionist policies.[192] This period was called the Licence Raj, or Permit Raj,[193] which was the elaborate system of licences, regulations, and accompanying red tape that were required to set up and run businesses in India between 1947 and 1990.[194] The Licence Raj was a result of Nehru and his successors' desire to have a planned economy where all aspects of the economy were controlled by the state, and licences were given to a select few. Up to 80 government agencies had to be satisfied before private companies could produce something; and, if the licence were granted, the government would regulate production.[195] The licence raj system continued under Indira Gandhi. In addition, many key sectors such as banking, steel coal, and oil were nationalized.[103][196] Under Rajiv Gandhi, the trade regime were liberalised with reduction in duties on several import items and incentives to promote exports.[197] Tax rates were reduced and curbs on company assests loosened.[198]

In 1991, the new Congress government, led by P. V. Narasimha Rao, initiated reforms to avert the impending 1991 economic crisis.[140][199] The reforms progressed furthest in opening up areas to foreign investment, reforming capital markets, deregulating domestic business, and reforming the trade regime. The goals of Rao's government were to reduce the fiscal deficit, privatize the public sector, and increase investment in infrastructure.[200] Trade reforms and changes in the regulation of foreign direct investment were introduced in order to open India to foreign trade while stabilising external loans.[201] Rao chose Manmohan Singh for the job. Singh, an acclaimed economist and former chairman of the Reserve Bank, played a central role in implementing these reforms.[202]

In 2004, Singh became prime minister of the Congress-led UPA government. Singh remained prime minister after the UPA won the 2009 general elections. The UPA government introduced policies aimed at reforming the banking and financial sectors, as well as public sector companies.[203] It also introduced policies aimed at relieving farmers of their debt.[204] In 2005, Singh government introduced the value added tax, replacing the sales tax. India was able to resist the worst effects of the global economic crisis of 2008.[205][206] Singh's government continued the Golden Quadrilateral, the Indian highway modernisation program that was initiated by Vajpayee's government.[207] Then Finance Minister of India Pranab Mukherjee implemented many tax reforms, notably scrapping the Fringe Benefits Tax and the Commodities Transaction Tax.[208] He implemented the Goods and Services Tax (GST) during his tenure.[209] His reforms were well received by major corporate executives and economists. The introduction of retrospective taxation, however, has been criticised by some economists.[210] Mukherjee expanded funding for several social sector schemes including the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM). He also supported budget increases for improving literacy and health care. He expanded infrastructure programmes such as the National Highway Development Programme.[211] Electricity coverage was also expanded during his tenure. Mukherjee also reaffirmed his commitment to the principle of fiscal prudence as some economists expressed concern about the rising fiscal deficits during his tenure, the highest since 1991. Mukherjee declared the expansion in government spending was only temporary.[212]

National defence and home affairs
Since independence, India was in pursuit of nuclear capabilities, as Nehru felt that nuclear energy could take the country forward and help achieve its developmental goals.[213] Consequently, Nehru began to seek assistance from the United Kingdom, Canada and the USA.[214][215] In 1958 the government of India with the help of Homi J. Bhabha adopted three-phase power production plan and the Nuclear Research Institute was established in 1954.[216] Indira Gandhi witnessed continuous nuclear testing by China from 1964 onwards, which she considered an existential threat to India.[217][218] India conducted its first nuclear test in the Pokhran desert in Rajasthan on May 18, 1974, under the name Operation Smiling Buddha.[219] India asserted that the test was for "peaceful purposes",[220] However, the test was criticised by other countries and the United States and Canada suspended all nuclear support to India.[221] In spite of intense international criticism, the nuclear test was domestically popular, and caused an immediate revival of Indira Gandhi's popularity, which had flagged considerably from its heights after the 1971 war.[222]

The transition to statehood for parts of Northeast India was successfully overseen by her administration.[223] In 1972, Indira Gandhi granted statehood to Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, while the North-East Frontier Agency was declared a union territory and renamed Arunachal Pradesh.[224][225] This was followed by the annexation of Sikkim in 1975.[226]

Manmohan Singh's administration initiated a massive reconstruction effort in Kashmir to stabilise the region and strengthened anti-terrorism laws with amendments to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA).[227] After a period of initial success, insurgent infiltration and terrorism in Kashmir has increased since 2009. However, the Singh administration was successful in reducing terrorism in Northeast India.[228] Under the background of the Punjab insurgency, the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) was passed. The aim of the law is mainly directed towards eliminating the infiltrators from Pakistan. The law gave wide powers to law enforcement agencies for dealing with national terrorist and 'socially disruptive activities. The police were not obliged to produce a detainee before a judicial magistrate within 24 hours. The law was widely criticised by human rights organisations. After the November 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, the UPA government created the National Investigation Agency (NIA), in response to the need for a central agency to combat terrorism.[229] The Unique Identification Authority of India was established in February 2009 to implement the proposed Multipurpose National Identity Card, with the objective of increasing national security.[230]

Education and healthcare
The Congress government under Nehru oversaw the establishment of many institutions of higher learning, including the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, the Indian Institutes of Technology, the Indian Institutes of Management and the National Institutes of Technology. The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) was established in 1961 as a literary, scientific and charitable Society under the Societies' Registration Act.[231] Jawahar Lal Nehru outlined a commitment in his five-year plans to guarantee free and compulsory primary education to all of India's children. Rajiv Gandhi's premiership pioneered public information infrastructure and innovation in India.[232] His government allowed the import of fully assembled motherboards, which led to the price of computers being reduced.[233] The concept of having Navodaya Vidyalaya in every district of India was born as a part of National Policy on Education (NPE).[234]

In 2005, The Congress-led government started the National Rural Health Mission, which employed about 500,000 community health workers. It was praised by economist Jeffrey Sachs.[235] In 2006, it implemented a proposal to reserve 27% of seats in the All India Institute of Medical Studies (AIIMS), the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), the Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs), and other central higher education institutions, for Other Backward Classes, which led to the 2006 Indian anti-reservation protests.[236] The Singh government also continued the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme, which includes the introduction and improvement of mid-day school meals and the opening of new schools throughout India, especially in rural areas, to fight illiteracy.[237] During Manmohan Singh's prime-ministership, eight Institutes of Technology were opened in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Orissa, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Himachal Pradesh.[238]

Manmohan Singh with erstwhile President of the United States Barack Obama at the White House
Throughout much of the Cold War period, Congress supported a foreign policy of nonalignment that called for India to form ties with both the Western and Eastern Blocs, but to avoid formal alliances with either.[239] US support for Pakistan led the party to endorse a friendship treaty with the Soviet Union in 1971.[240] Congress has continued the foreign policy started by P. V. Narasimha Rao. This includes the peace process with Pakistan, and the exchange of high-level visits by leaders from both countries.[241] The UPA government has tried to end the border dispute with the People's Republic of China through negotiations.[242][243] Relations with Afghanistan have also been a concern for Congress.[244] During Afghan President Hamid Karzai's visit to New Delhi in August 2008, Manmohan Singh increased the aid package to Afghanistan for the development of schools, health clinics, infrastructure, and defence.[245] India is now one of the single largest aid donors to Afghanistan.[245] To nourish political, security, cultural and economical connections with central Asian countries, it launched Connect Central Asia policy in 2012. This policy is aimed at strengthing and expanding India's relations with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Look East policy was initiated in 1992 by Narsimha Rao to cultivate extensive economic and strategic relations with the nations of Southeast Asia to bolster its standing as a regional power and a counterweight to the strategic influence of the People's Republic of China. Subsequently, in 1992 Rao decided to bring into open India's relations with Israel, which had been kept covertly active for a few years during his tenure as a Foreign Minister, and permitted Israel to open an embassy in New Delhi.[246] Rao decided to maintain a distance from the Dalai Lama in order to avoid aggravating Beijing's suspicions and concerns, and made successful overtures to Tehran.[247]

Even though the Congress foreign policy doctrine stands for maintaining friendly relations with all the countries of the world, it has always exhibited a special bias towards the Afro-Asian nations. It played active role in forming Group of 77 (1964, Group of 15 (1990), Indian Ocean Rim Association, and SAARC. Indira Gandhi firmly tied Indian anti-imperialist interests in Africa to those of the Soviet Union. She openly and enthusiastically supported liberation struggles in Africa.[248] In April 2006, New Delhi hosted an India–Africa summit attended by the leaders of 15 African states.[249]

The party opposes arms race and advocates disarmament, both conventional and nuclear.[250] When in power between 2004 and 2014, Congress worked on India's relationship with the United States. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh visited the US in July 2005 to negotiate an India–United States Civil Nuclear Agreement. US president George W. Bush visited India in March 2006; during this visit, a nuclear agreement that would give India access to nuclear fuel and technology in exchange for the IAEA inspection of its civil nuclear reactors was proposed. Over two years of negotiations, followed by approval from the IAEA, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the United States Congress, the agreement was signed on 10 October 2008.[251] However, it has not signed Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) due to their discrimninatory and hagemonistic nature.[252][253]

Congress' policy has been to cultivate friendly relations with Japan as well as European Union countries including the United Kingdom, France, and Germany.[254] Diplomatic relations with Iran have continued, and negotiations over the Iran-Pakistan-India gas pipeline have taken place.[255] Congress' policy has also been to improve relations with other developing countries, particularly Brazil and South Africa.[256]

The Congress party emphasizes social equality, freedom, secularism, and equal opportunity.[257] Its political position is generally considered to be on the centre.[16] Historically, the party has represented farmers, laborers, and religious minorities as it has opposed unregulated business and finance and favored progressive income taxes. In September 2005, UPA government passed Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA).[258] The MGNREGA was initiated with the objective of "enhancing livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work." Another aim of MGNREGA is to create durable assets (such as roads, canals, ponds and wells).[258]

The Congress has position itself as both pro-Hindu and protector of the minorities. The party supports Mahatma Gandhi's doctrine of Sarva Dharma Sama Bhava collectively termed by its party members as secularism. Current chief minister of Punjab and senior Congress member Amarinder Singh said that, "India belongs to all religions, which is its strength, and the Congress would not allow anyone to destroy its cherished secular values.”[259] On November 9, 1989 Rajiv Gandhi had allowed “shilanyas” (foundation stone-laying ceremony) adjacent to the then disputed Ram Janmabhoomi site.[260] Subsequently, his government faced heavy criticism over a passing The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1986, which nullified the Supreme Court's judgment in the Shah Bano case. The 1984 violence made the Congress party lose a moral argument over secularism. The BJP questioned the Congress party's moral authority in questioning it about the 2002 Gujarat riots.[261] The Congress has distanced itself from Hindutva ideology, though the party has softened the stance after defeat in 2014 and 2019 general elections.[262]

After independence the Congress advocated the idea of establishing Hindi as the sole national language of India. Nehru led the faction of the Congress party which promoted Hindi as the lingua franca of the Indian nation.[263] However, the non-Hindi speaking Indian states especially Tamil Nadu opposed it, which wanted the continued use of English language. Lal Bahadur Shastri's tenure witnessed several protests, and riots including the Madras anti-Hindi agitation of 1965.[264] Shashtri's appealed to agitators to withdraw the movement and assured that the English would continue to be used as the official language as long as the non-Hindi speaking states wanted.[265]

The Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which, among other things, criminalises homosexuality, erstwhile Congress president Rahul Gandhi said, "Sexuality is a matter of personal freedom and should be left to individuals". Leading party figure and former Finance Minister P. Chidambaram stated that the "Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India judgement must be quickly reversed". On 18 December 2015, Shashi Tharoor leading member of the party introduced a private member's bill to replace Section 377 in the Indian Penal Code and decriminalize consensual same-sex relations. The bill was defeated in the first reading. In March 2016, Tharoor again reintroduce the private member's bill to decriminalize homosexuality but was voted down for the second time.

 List of presidents of the Indian National Congress, All India Congress Committee, and Congress Working Committee
At present, the president and the All India Congress Committee (AICC) are elected by delegates from state and district parties at an annual national conference; in every Indian state and union territory—or pradesh—there is a Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC),[266] which is the state-level unit of the party responsible for directing political campaigns at local and state levels, and assisting the campaigns for parliamentary constituencies.[267] Each PCC has a working committee of twenty members, most of whom are appointed by the party president, the leader of the state party, who is chosen by the national president. Those elected as members of the states' legislative assemblies form the Congress Legislature Parties in the various state assemblies; their chairperson is usually the party's nominee for Chief Ministership. The party is also organised into various committees, and sections; it publishes a daily newspaper, the National Herald.[268] Despite being a party with a structure, Congress under Indira Gandhi did not hold any organizational elections after 1972.[269] Nonetheless in 2004, when the Congress was voted back into power, Manmohan Singh became the first Prime Minister not to be the president of the party since establishment of the practice of the president holding both positions.[270]

The AICC is composed of delegates sent from the PCCs.[268] The delegates elect Congress committees, including the Congress Working Committee, consisting of senior party leaders and office-bearers. The AICC takes all-important executive and political decisions. Since Indira Gandhi formed Congress (I) in 1978, the President of the Indian National Congress has effectively been the party's national leader, head of the organisation, head of the Working Committee and all chief Congress committees, chief spokesman, and Congress' choice for Prime Minister of India. Constitutionally, the president is elected by the PCCs and members of the AICC; however, this procedure has often been bypassed by the Working Committee, which has elected its own candidate.[268]

Congress student wing annual conference
The Congress Parliamentary Party (CPP) consists of elected MPs in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. There is also a Congress Legislative Party (CLP) leader in each state. The CLP consists of all Congress Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) in each state. In cases of states where the Congress is single-handedly ruling the government, the CLP leader is the Chief Minister. Other directly affiliated groups include:

The party under the stewardship of Nehru had the symbol ‘Pair of bullocks carrying a yoke’ which struck a chord with masses who were predominantly farmers.[276] In 1969, due to internal conflicts within the Congress party, Indira Gandhi decided to break out and form a party of her own, with the majority of the Congress party members in support of her in the new party which was named Congress(R). The symbol of Indira's Congress (R) or Congress (Requisitionists) during the 1971–1977 period was a cow with a suckling calf.[277][102] After losing the support of 76 out of the party's 153 members in the Lok Sabha, Indira's new political outfit the Congress (I) or Congress (Indira) evolved and she opted for the hand (open palm) symbol.

Dynasticism is fairly common in many political parties in India, including the Congress party.[278] Six members of the Nehru–Gandhi family have been presidents of the party.[279] The party started being controlled by Indira Gandhi's family during the emergency with her younger son, Sanjay taking on a prominent role.[280] This was characterized by servility and sycophancy towards the family which later led to hereditary succession of Rajiv Gandhi as successor after Indira Gandhi's assassination, as well as the party's selection of Sonia Gandhi as Rajiv's successor after his assassination, which she turned down.[281] Since the formation of Congress (I) by Indira Gandhi in 1978, the party president has been from her family except for the period between 1991 and 1998. In the last three elections to the Lok Sabha combined, 37% of Congress party MPs had family members precede them in politics.[282]

From the first general election in 1952 when Jawaharlal Nehru led it to a landslide victory (it won 364 of the 401 seats), the Congress won in the majority of the following state elections and paved the way for a Nehruvian era of single-party dominance. The party during the post-independence era has governed most of the States and union territories of India.

As of May 2021, the INC is in power in the states of Chhattisgarh, Punjab and Rajasthan, where the party has the majority.[283][284] In Maharashtra, it shares power as a junior ally with alliance partners Nationalist Congress Party, Shiv Sena and other smaller regional parties under the multi-party Maha Vikas Aghadi coalition. In Jharkhand, it shares power as a junior ally with Jharkhand Mukti Morcha. In Tamil Nadu it shares power as a junior ally with the DMK, CPI, CPI(M), VCK under the coalition Secular Progressive Alliance or SPA. The Congress has previously been the sole party in power in Delhi, Andhra Pradesh, Meghalaya, Haryana, Uttarakhand and in the Union Territory of Puducherry. The Congress has never been a part of the government in Telangana, however, the Congress has been in the power in Andhra Pradesh before the state was bifurcated. Congress has enjoyed overwhelming electoral majority for over decades in Arunachal Pradesh, Delhi, Kerala, Maharashtra and Punjab. It has a regional political alliance in Tamil Nadu named the Secular Progressive Alliance, and in Kerala, it is the United Democratic Front.