Founded in 1885 under the guidance of British civil servant Allan Octavian Hume, the Indian National Congress (INC), popularly known as the Congress, is the country’s oldest political party. Today it is one of the two major national political parties, other being the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and operates on the ideology of Gandhian Socialism and Social Democracy. Its political position is centre-left in contrast to BJP which is the right-wing nationalist party.


Members of the Theosophical Society, namely Dadabhai Naoroji, Surendranath Banerjee, M.G. Ranade, Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee, Dinshaw Wacha, Monomohun Ghose and William Wedderburn, headed by A.O. Hume, established the Indian National Congress to obtain greater share of Indians in the British government. Liberal nationalism became the war-cry of the Congress, drawing to it more than 15 million members and triple the number of participants in the anti-imperialist struggle. Though it began as a political party, the INC was symbolic of the largest vehicle of the Indian National Movement in the pre-independence era, being the sole representative of the people of the country and representing social reform causes and human progress.

The Congress is credited with a number of historic demands and movements of the freedom struggle. With Mahatma Gandhi adorning the centre stage of Indian freedom struggle, a number of other members of the Congress joined the freedom struggle. Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Jayaprakash Narayan, Jivatram Kripalani, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Rajendra Prasad and others embraced the Gandhian policy of Satyagraha and his concept of non-violence. The Congress became increasingly popular among the masses, though with years, it began to identify itself with the big business houses of the Tatas and the Birlas. In the final years of the British rule, the Congress became synonymous with the leadership and spiritual guidance of Mahatma Gandhi.

With the independence of India in 1947 and the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru became the sole undisputed head of the INC in independent India. His daughter Indira Gandhi became his political successor. But she gradually became autocratic and dictatorial in her approach, as the Congress President as well as the PM of India, leading to factionalism within the Congress party. In the face of severe opposition, she proclaimed National Emergency in 1975. She lifted the emergency in 1977 when fresh elections were held. Indira Gandhi’s authoritarian rule led to the first electoral defeat of the Congress at the hands of the Janata Party in 1977.

The present President of the INC is Rahul Gandhi, son of Former President Sonia Gandhi. The Nehru-Gandhi legacy has percolated to the party’s top leadership even today. The Congress has won General Elections a number of times in the country. The 2009 elections made the Congress form the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). Manmohan Singh was chosen again as the Prime Minister of India, and represents.

The Congress had to face a drubbing in the 2014 Indian General Elections, winning only 44 seats out of the 543 Lok Sabha seats. The BJP registered a landslide victory in the elections, accounting for 282 seats on its own. Thereafter, the Congress lost to BJP in every subsequent state elections in 2014.

Election Symbol and its Significance
The Election Symbol of the Congress party, as approved by the Election Commission of India, is the “right hand”, with its palm-side facing front. It is usually seen in the centre of an Indian flag, which forms its background.The fingers of the hand are pressed together. This election symbol is significant as it was selected by the Indira Gandhi-led Congress.

The symbol of the original Congress, founded in 1885 was different - it had a symbol of ‘two bullocks with plough’. The present hand symbol was first used by Indira Gandhi as she split from the old faction and created the New Congress. The hand is symbolic of strength, energy and unity. The Congress is the largest democratic party in the country with the largest number of members and party worker. The Congress, according to its symbol, works in unity with the members and the masses, thereby forming a strong party. The working of the Congress, which follows various ranks within its organisational structure, is also representative of the energy and efforts needed to function as a party.

The Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC) is the smallest functional unit of the Congress, present at the state-level in every state or Pradesh. Together, the delegates of the PCCs form the All India Congress Committee (AICC). This structured working of the party lends unity, show of strength and effort to rule across India.

Leaders of Congress
The Congress Working Committee is the highest decision-making body of the INC. The leaders of the INC, who are also their representatives and national executives, are:
Sonia Gandhi, former President of INC - Sonia Gandhi, the former Parliamentary Chairperson of the INC, succeeded her husband Rajiv Gandhi as the Congress President in 1998 and has remained in that post till mid of December 2017. She stepped down from her position and passed the title to her son, Rahul Gandhi. She is the longest serving party President in the history of the INC. She has served as the President of the National Advisory Council (NAC), a body set up to aid and advise the Prime Minister in his governance of the country. She has also served as the Leader of Opposition in the 13th Lok Sabha in 1999, when the BJP-led NDA government came to power. Sonia Gandhi is the Chairperson of the present United Progressive Alliance (UPA) since 2004. The Congress-led UPA was in power consecutively in 2004 and 2009.
Rahul Gandhi, President of the INC - Rahul Gandhi is a Member of Parliament from the Amethi constituency in UP. He served as the vice president of the party and took the title of party president in December 2017. He is also the Chairperson of the Indian Youth Congress as well as the National Students Union of India (NSUI). Rahul Gandhi was the Prime Ministerial candidate from the INC in the 2014 General Elections.
Motilal Vora, Treasurer - Motilal Vora is the treasurer of the India National Congress and current Rajya Sabha member from Chhattisgarh.
Ahmed Patel, Political Secretary - He is one of the most senior leader in Congress and served as a political secretary to the former Congress President Sonia Gandhi for 16 years until she left the position. He is widely credited with the Congress' performance in the 2004 and 2009 General elections.
Manmohan Singh, former Prime Minister - Singh had retained the post of PM for two consecutive terms in 2004 and 2009. He was the first PM after Jawaharlal Nehru, to have been re-elected after completing the full five-year term in office. His government under UPA-1 and UPA-2 was said to have brought about certain important acts and schemes such as the Right to Information Act in 2008, Rural Health Mission, Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, and the Food Security Bill in 2013.
Sushil Kumar Shinde, former Minister of Home Affairs - Shinde is a member of the Congress Working Committee in the category of ‘Permanent Invitees’. Besides functioning as the party Leader in Lok Sabha, he served as the Minister of Home Affairs in the UPA-2 government.
A.K. Anthony, former Minister of Defence - Antony was the Defence Minister of India in the UPA government. He is currently the member of Rajya Sabha.
Digvijay Singh, General Secretary, AICC - Singh, former Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, is one of the important figures in the INC. He is currently the member of Rajya Sabha.
Achievements of Congress
As the oldest-surviving national political party, the INC has had a number of achievements in the political scenario of the country. Some of these are listed below:
The INC has a number of frontal organisations and mass wings under its banner. Its student wing called the National Students Union of India (NSUI) has a vibrant presence in student politics across the country. It has contributed to the cause of women through its women’s wing called All India Mahila Congress (AIMC). Its labour wing, one of the largest trade unions in the country, is called Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC). Its youth wing is called Indian Youth Congress (IYC).
The UPA-1 and UPA-2 governments initiated some of the important social policies like the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee (MGNAREGA) and National Rural Health Mission (NHM). The party claims to take into account the causes of the marginalised and underprivileged sections of the society through reservation policies in all sectors of government jobs and education. The INC also supports the family planning with birth control scheme, though it does not overtly adhere to it in terms of a policy per say. The INC claims to operate on the Gandhian principles of Sarvodaya or upliftment of all sections of the society.
The INC has had healthy foreign relations with USA, European Union and other SAARC countries. The UPA government initiated peace talks with neighbouring countries like China and Pakistan. The INC maintained the policy of non-alignment as its major foreign intervention. In fact, Jawaharlal Nehru was the founder of the Non-Alignment Movement. The successive Congress governments have been participants in major international organisations like World Trade Organization, G20 Industrial Summits, International Monetary Fund, United Nations, UN Security Council, East Asia Summit and others.
The Congress government has been a proponent of economic neo-liberalism, as its economic policy since 1991. They initiated free market policies and other schemes such as disinvestment of profit making PSUs, introducing FDIs in finance sector and MNCs in retail sector. These were opposed by other political parties as being anti-people.
The historic Right to Information Act (RTI) was enacted in 2005, thereby making the government responsible for its actions. Other significant legislations passed by the Congress are Lokpal and Lokayukta Bill, Benami Transaction Prohibition Bill, Whistle Blowers Protection Bill, Public Procurement Bill and others. Another significant piece of legislation passed in February 2013 was Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act.

Indian National Congress, Congress-I (also known as the Congress Party and abbreviated INC) is a major political party in India. Created in 1885 by A. O. Hume, Dadabhai Naoroji and Sir Dinshaw Edulji Wacha, the Indian National Congress became the nation's leader in the Independence Movement, with over 15 million Indians involved in its organizations and over 70 million participants in its struggle against the British Empire. During this phase, it functioned not so much as a political party than as a forum for Indians and their British supporters to express to the colonial authorities their views, opinions and to assert India’s right to self-determination. After independence in 1947, it became the nation's dominant political party, in power from 1947 until 1977, then from 1980 to 1999, 1991 to 1996 and winning the 2004 general election. In the 14th Lok Sabha (2004-2009), 145 INC members, the largest contingent amongst all parties, serve in the house. The party is currently the chief member of the ruling United Progressive Alliance coalition supported by the Left Front. Famous members include Annie Besant, its first woman INC President, Mahatma Gandhi (President in 1924) and Sarojini Naidu, the first Indian woman President (1925) and the first woman State Governor and India’s first woman Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi.

The INC has traditionally tried to bridge communitarian divides, regarding the secular principle as most appropriate for a multi-religious state. Concern for maintaining communal harmony had led to criticism of favoring minorities, especially Muslims. On the one hand, Congress is closely identified with pride in India’s cultural legacy. On the other, it has promoted women’s rights and social reform in such areas as untouchability and economic empowerment, tending towards socialist principles.[1] The Congress has also had electoral success in many Indian states, controlling the majority of state governments for the first 20 years of independence.

History
The history of the Indian National Congress falls into two distinct eras:

The pre-independence era, when the organization was at the forefront of the struggle for independence;
The post-independence era, when as a political party Congress enjoyed a prominent place in Indian politics, ruling the country for 48 of the 60 years since independence in 1947.
The pre-independence era

M. K Gandhi was spiritual leader of the INC and the acknowledged "father of India."
Founded in 1885 with the objective of obtaining a greater share in government for educated Indians, the Indian National Congress was initially not opposed to British rule. The Congress met once a year during December. Indeed, it was a Scotsman, Allan Octavian Hume, who brought about its first meeting in Mumbai, with the approval of Lord Dufferin, the then-Viceroy.

Womesh Chandra Bonerjee was the first President of the INC. The first meeting was scheduled to be held in Pune, but due to a plague outbreak there, the meeting was later shifted to Mumbai. The first Session of INC was held from 28-31 December 1885, and was attended by 72 delegates.

A few years down the line, the demands of INC became more radical in the face of constant opposition from the government, and the party became very active in the independence movement. By 1907 the party was split into two halves: the Garam Dal of Bal Gangadhar Tilak, or Extremists (literally "hot faction"), and the Naram Dal of Gopal Krishna Gokhale, or Moderates (literally "soft faction"), distinguished by their attitude towards the British.


In its time as the nation's leader in the freedom struggle, it produced the nation's greatest leaders. Before the Gandhi Era came leaders like Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, Lala Lajpat Rai, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Mohammed Ali Jinnah (later leader of the Muslim League and instrumental in the creation of Pakistan), all starting with the first legendary icon of Indians: Dadabhai Naoroji, the president of the sister Indian National Association and later the first Indian Member of Parliament in the British House of Commons.

With the rise of Mahatma Gandhi's popularity and his Satyagraha art of revolution came Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru (the nation's first Prime Minister), Dr. Rajendra Prasad (the nation's first President), Khan Mohammad Abbas Khan, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Chakravarti Rajgopalachari, Jivatram Kripalani and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The Congress under Gandhi's influence became the first integrated mass organization in the country, bringing together millions of people by specifically working against caste differences, untouchability, poverty, and religious and ethnic boundaries. Although predominantly Hindu, it had members from virtually every religion, ethnic group, economic class and linguistic group. At the time of the Quit India movement, the Congress was undoubtedly the strongest political and revolutionary organization in India. The Indian National Congress could claim to be the true representative of the Indian people.

The 1929 Lahore session under the presidency of Jawaharlal Nehru holds special significance as in this session "Poorna Swaraj" (complete independence) was declared as the goal of INC. The 26th January 1930 was declared as "Poorna Swaraj Diwas," Independence Day although the British remained in India a number of years longer. It was to commemorate this date particularly that The Indian Constitution was formally adopted on 26 January 1950 (even though it was passed on 26 November 1949).

After the First World War the party became associated with Mahatma Gandhi, who remained its unofficial, spiritual leader and mass icon even as younger men and women became party president. The party was in many ways an umbrella organization, sheltering within itself radical socialists, traditionalists and even Hindu and Muslim conservatives.

The post-independence era
The party remained in power for thirty continuous years between independence in 1947 and its first taste of electoral defeat (at the national level) in 1977.

Jawaharlal Nehru
Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Patel are said to have held the view that the INC was formed only for achieving independence and should have been disbanded in 1947.[2] However, at the time of independence, the INC (led by Jawaharlal Nehru) was a major political organization in the country, and was established as the major political party. The Congress thus, considering the perceived need for a stable leadership and guiding vision after the terrible chaos and confusion following the Partition of India and Independence, was re-established as an electoral party in independent India. Across several general elections, the party ruled uninterrupted until 1977, and has remained a major political force.

After the murder of Gandhi in 1948 and the death of Sardar Patel in 1950, Jawaharlal Nehru was the sole remaining iconic national leader, and he became key to the political potency and future of the Congress. Nehru embraced secularism, socialist economic policies and a non-aligned foreign policy, which became the hallmark of the modern Congress Party. Nehru's policies challenged the landed class, the business class and improved the position of religious minorities and lower caste Hindus. A generation of freedom fighting leaders were soon replaced by a generation of people who had grown up in the shadow of Nehru. Nehru led the Congress Party to consecutively awesome majorities in the elections of 1952, 1957 and 1962.

After Nehru's death in 1964, the party's future first came into question. No leader was competitive enough to touch Nehru's iconic status, so the second-stage leadership mustered around the compromise candidate, the gentle, soft-spoken and Nehruvian Lal Bahadur Shastri. Shastri remained Prime Minister till his own death in 1966, and a broad Congress Party election opted for Indira Gandhi, Nehru's daughter, over the right-wing, conservative Morarji Desai.

In 1955 in Awadi session the party adopted a socialistic pattern of society for India.

Indira Gandhi

Congress mural in Kolkata
The first serious challenge to Congress hegemony came in 1967 when a united opposition, under the banner of Samyukt Vidhanayak Dal, won control over several states in the Hindi belt. Indira Gandhi, the daughter of Nehru, and Congress president, was then challenged by the majority of the party leadership. The conflict led to a split, and Indira launched a separate INC. Initially this party was known as Congress (R), but it soon came to be generally known as the New Congress. The official party became known as Indian National Congress (Organisation) led by Kamaraj. It was informally called the Old Congress. As Indira Priyadarshini had control over the state machinery, her faction was recognized as the "real" INC by the Election Commission of India, although her organization was the break-away group.

The split can in some ways be seen as a left-wing/right-wing division. Indira Gandhi wanted to use a populist agenda in order to mobilize popular support for the party. She raised slogans such as Garibi Hatao (Remove Poverty), and wanted to develop closer ties with the Soviet Union. The regional party elites, who formed the INC(O), stood for a more conservative agenda, and distrusted Soviet help. INC(O) later merged into the Janata Party.

Gradually, Indira Gandhi grew more and more authoritarian. Following allegations of widespread rigging in the general elections, a court overturned Indira Gandhi's victory in the Parliamentary constituency. Facing growing opposition she proclaimed a state of National emergency in 1975, curtailed the powers of the courts, and unleashed a police state with herself as the supreme leader ('acting Prime Minister').

After she lifted the emergency in 1977, more Congress factions were formed, the one remaining loyal to Indira Gandhi being popularly known as Congress(I) with an 'I' for Indira. The Congress (I) was routed in the general elections by the Janata Party. The party was able to return to power in the 1980 elections. In 1984 Indira Gandhi was assassinated by two of her Sikh bodyguards, as a revenge for Operation Blue Star. In the following days thousands of Sikhs were killed in the 1984 riots, mainly in Delhi, by activists and leaders of the Congress Party. [1]. About the riots, the new PM and Indira's son, Rajiv Gandhi had infamously remarked, "When a big tree falls, the earth is bound to shake."

The post-Indira era

Sonia Gandhi, Leader of the INC
After Indira, her son Rajiv Gandhi, took over as Congress leader and led the party to victory with a large majority in the 1984 Lok Sabha elections. It governed from 1984-9 and then was defeated in the 1989 general election. Rajiv Gandhi was also assassinated by the LTTE during the course of the election campaign in 1991. Following Rajiv Gandhi's assassination, P.V. Narasimha Rao succeeded him as Congress leader and became prime minister.

The 1990s was a period of prolonged crisis for the Congress. After gradually losing political influence the party asked the Rajiv Gandhi's widow, Sonia, to accept the position as Congress President. Refusing in 1991, the Congress stuck with Narasimha Rao. Rao dramatically changed the party's traditionally socialist policies and introduced major economic reforms and liberalization, with the help of then Finance minister (and future Prime Minister) Manmohan Singh. Nonetheless, his involvement in the bribery of members of parliament was a major issue which led to the downfall of the Congress in 1996, and subsequently his own disgraced exit from politics.

Former treasurer Sitaram Kesri took over the reins of the party and oversaw the Congress support to the United Front governments that ran from 1996 - 1998. During his tenure, several key leaders broke away from the party, and serious infighting broke out among those left. In 1998, Sonia Gandhi finally accepted the post of Congress President, in a move that may have saved the party from extinction.

After her election as party leader, a section of the party, which objected to the choice, broke away and formed the Nationalist Congress Party. (Where breakaway factions are active, the use of "Congress (I)" to denote the party run by Indira Gandhi's successors continues.) There have been repeated attempts by the Indian nationalist groups (such as the BJP) to discredit Sonia Gandhi's leadership on the basis of her foreign origin - she is Italian-born.

Although the Congress expedited the downfall of the NDA government in 1999 by promising an alternative, Ms. Gandhi's decision was followed by fresh elections and the Congress party's worst-ever tally in the lower house. The party spent the interval period forging alliances and overseeing changes in the state and central organizations to revive the party. It has had many electoral successes which led up to the formation of a Congress-led government in 2004.

Indian Prime Ministers from the Congress Party
Jawaharlal Nehru (1947 - 1964)
Gulzarilal Nanda (May - June1964, January 1966)
Lal Bahadur Shastri (1964 - 1966)
Indira Gandhi (1966 - 1977, 1980 - 1984)
Rajiv Gandhi (1984 - 1989)
P.V. Narasimha Rao (1991 - 1996)
Manmohan Singh (2004 -)
Political accusations
Since the party has dominated the political landscape of India for over a century, there are many charges of corruption and similar charges against it. Some examples are:

Anti-Sikh riots - After the assassination of Indira Gandhi by Sikh Body Guards following Operation Bluestar, many Congress workers prominently including Jagdish Tytler and Sajjan Kumar were accused of inciting and participating in anti-Sikh riots that killed thousands. The Congress apologized many years later for its silence on these events, an apology that was considered inadequate by some of those concerned.
Volcker report - The Independent Inquiry Committee (IIC) appointed by the United Nations in its final report released on October 27, 2005 confirms that documents state: 'Beneficiary: India: Congress Party' with an entitlement of 4 million barrels of crude' and `Beneficiary: India: Singh Mr K. Natwar' with an entitlement of 4 million barrels'.
The opposition Bharatiya Janata Party has repeatedly accused the Congress of showing favoritism to the Indian Muslim community and the toleration, or even promotion of, Islamic and obscurantism. Congress policy is also accused of causing fifty years of economic stagnation, following Independence, and of excessive veneration of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty.
Formation of 2004 Government of India
In the 2004 general elections, the Congress alliance won the largest number of seats and got an assurance of support from the Left Front upsetting the Atal Behari Vajpayee-led National Democratic Alliance, which was variously forecasted to win outright victory or at least emerge as the largest alliance. Shortly thereafter, Sonia Gandhi was nominated by the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance to be the next Prime Minister. But in what was described as the dropping of a political bombshell, Sonia Gandhi refused to take the position based on her "inner voice." She backed eminent economist, former Union Finance Minister and senior Congress leader Dr. Manmohan Singh for the post of Prime Minister, and he was sworn-in as Prime Minister on May 22, 2004. He became India's first Sikh head of government.

Internal organization
The organization developed by Mahatma Gandhi's reorganization of the Congress in the years of 1918 to 1920 has largely been retained till today.

In every Indian state and union territory or pradesh, there is a Pradesh Congress Committee, which is the provincial unit of the party, responsible for directing political campaigns at local and state levels and assisting the campaigns for Parliamentary constituencies. Each PCC has a Working Committee of 10-15 key members, and the state president is the leader of the state unit. The Congressmen elected as members of the states legislative assemblies form the Congress Legislature Parties in the various state assemblies, and their chairperson is usually the party's nominee for Chief Ministership.

The All India Congress Committee is formed of delegates sent from the PCCs around the country. The delegates elect various Congress committees, including the Congress Working Committee, which consists of senior party leaders and office bearers, and takes all important executive and political decisions.

The President of the Indian National Congress is in effect the party's national leader, head of the organization, head of the Working Committee and all chief Congress committees, chief spokesman and the Congress choice to become the Prime Minister of India.

Constitutionally, the president is to be elected by the vote of the PCCs and members of the AICC. However, this procedure has often been by-passed by the Working Committee, choosing to elect its own candidate as an emergency measure.

The Congress Parliamentary Party is the group of elected MPs in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. Their elected chairperson is the leader of the majority, and supposed to be the Prime Minister. However, there have been notable exceptions.