The Bharatiya Janata Party (pronounced [bʱaːɾət̪iːjə dʒənət̪aː paːrtiː] (About this soundlisten); English: Indian People's Party; abbr. BJP) is one of two major political parties in India, along with the Indian National Congress.[36] It has been the ruling political party of the Republic of India since 2014.[37] The BJP is a right-wing party, and its policy has historically reflected Hindu nationalist positions.[38][39] It has close ideological and organisational links to the much older Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS).[40] As of 2020, it is the country's largest political party in terms of representation in the national parliament and state assemblies and is by far the world's largest party in terms of primary membership.[41][42][43] Its principle opposition, the Indian National Congress, is a distant second in India with 20 million members.[44]

The BJP's origin lies in the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, formed in 1951 by Shyama Prasad Mukherjee.[45] After the State of Emergency in 1977, the Jana Sangh merged with several other parties to form the Janata Party; it defeated the incumbent Congress party in the 1977 general election. After three years in power, the Janata party dissolved in 1980 with the members of the erstwhile Jana Sangh reconvening to form the BJP. Although initially unsuccessful, winning only two seats in the 1984 general election, it grew in strength on the back of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement. Following victories in several state elections and better performances in national elections, the BJP became the largest party in the parliament in 1996; however, it lacked a majority in the lower house of Parliament, and its government lasted only 13 days.[46]

After the 1998 general election, the BJP-led coalition known as the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) under Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee formed a government that lasted for a year. Following fresh elections, the NDA government, again headed by Vajpayee, lasted for a full term in office; this was the first non-Congress government to do so. In the 2004 general election, the NDA suffered an unexpected defeat, and for the next ten years the BJP was the principal opposition party. Long time Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi led it to a landslide victory in the 2014 general election. Since that election, Modi has led the NDA government as Prime Minister and as of February 2019, the alliance governs 18 states.

The official ideology of the BJP is integral humanism, first formulated by Deendayal Upadhyaya in 1965. The party expresses a commitment to Hindutva, and its policy has historically reflected Hindu nationalist positions. The BJP advocates social conservatism and a foreign policy centred on nationalist principles. Its key issues have included the abrogation of the special status to Jammu and Kashmir, the building of a Ram Temple in Ayodhya and the implementation of a uniform civil code. However, the 1998–2004 NDA government did not pursue any of these controversial issues. It instead focused on a largely liberal economic policy prioritising globalisation and economic growth over social welfare.[47] During BJP's rule, India experienced significant democratic backsliding.[48][49]

History
Predecessors
Bharatiya Jana Sangh (1951–77)
Main article: Bharatiya Jana Sangh
The BJP's origins lie in the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, popularly known as the Jana Sangh, founded by Syama Prasad Mukherjee in 1951 in response to the politics of the dominant Congress party. It was founded in collaboration with the Hindu nationalist volunteer organisation, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and was widely regarded as the political arm of the RSS.[50] The Jana Sangh's aims included the protection of India's "Hindu" cultural identity, in addition to countering what it perceived to be the appeasement of Muslim people and the country of Pakistan by the Congress party and then-Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. The RSS loaned several of its leading pracharaks, or full-time workers, to the Jana Sangh to get the new party off the ground. Prominent among these was Deendayal Upadhyaya, who was appointed General Secretary. The Jana Sangh won only three Lok Sabha seats in the first general elections in 1952. It maintained a minor presence in parliament until 1967.[51][52]


Portrait of Syama Prasad Mookerjee, founder of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh
The Jana Sangh's first major campaign, begun in early 1953, centred on a demand for the complete integration of Jammu and Kashmir into India.[53] Mookerjee was arrested in May 1953 for violating orders from the state government restraining him from entering Kashmir. He died of a heart attack the following month, while still in jail.[53] Mauli Chandra Sharma was elected to succeed Mookerjee; however, he was forced out of power by the RSS activists within the party, and the leadership went instead to Upadhyaya. Upadhyay remained the General Secretary until 1967, and worked to build a committed grassroots organisation in the image of the RSS. The party minimised engagement with the public, focusing instead on building its network of propagandists. Upadhyaya also articulated the philosophy of integral humanism, which formed the official doctrine of the party.[54] Younger leaders, such as Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Lal Krishna Advani also became involved with the leadership in this period, with Vajpayee succeeding Upadhyaya as president in 1968. The major themes on the party's agenda during this period were legislating a uniform civil code, banning cow slaughter and abolishing the special status given to Jammu and Kashmir.[55]

After assembly elections across the country in 1967, the party entered into a coalition with several other parties, including the Swatantra Party and the socialists. It formed governments in various states across the Hindi heartland, including Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. It was the first time the Jana Sangh held political office, albeit within a coalition; this caused the shelving of the Jana Sangh's more radical agenda.[56]

Janata Party (1977–80)
Main article: Janata Party
In 1975, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi imposed a state of emergency. The Jana Sangh took part in the widespread protests, with thousands of its members being imprisoned along with other agitators across the country. In 1977, the emergency was withdrawn and general elections were held. The Jana Sangh merged with parties from across the political spectrum, including the Socialist Party, the Congress (O) and the Bharatiya Lok Dal to form the Janata Party, with its main agenda being defeating Indira Gandhi.[52]

The Janata Party won a majority in 1977 and formed a government with Morarji Desai as Prime Minister. The former Jana Sangh contributed the largest tally to the Janata Party's parliamentary contingent, with 93 seats or 31% of its strength. Vajpayee, previously the leader of the Jana Sangh, was appointed the Minister of External Affairs.[57]

The national leadership of the former Jana Sangh consciously renounced its identity, and attempted to integrate with the political culture of the Janata Party, based on Gandhian and Hindu traditionalist principles. According to Christophe Jaffrelot, this proved to be impossible assimilation.[58] The state and local levels of the Jana Sangh remained relatively unchanged, retaining a strong association with the RSS, which did not sit well with the moderate centre-right constituents of the Party.[59] Violence between Hindus and Muslims increased sharply during the years that the Janata Party formed the government, with former Jana Sangha members being implicated in the riots at Aligarh and Jamshedpur in 1978–79. The other major constituents of the Janata Party demanded that the Jana Sangh should break from the RSS, which the Jana Sangh refused to do. Eventually, a fragment of the Janata Party broke off to form the Janata Party (Secular). The Morarji Desai government was reduced to a minority in the Parliament, forcing its resignation. Following a brief period of coalition rule, general elections were held in 1980, in which the Janata Party fared poorly, winning only 31 seats. In April 1980, shortly after the elections, the National Executive Council of the Janata Party banned its members from being 'dual members' of party and the RSS. In response, the former Jana Sangh members left to create a new political party, known as the Bharatiya Janata Party. [60][57]

BJP (1980–present)
Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the first Prime Minister from BJP (Left), Lal Krishna Advani, deputy Prime Minister under Vajpayee and one of the architects of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement (Right)
Formation and early days
Although the newly formed BJP was technically distinct from the Jana Sangh, the bulk of its rank and file were identical to its predecessor, with Vajpayee being its first president.[61] Historian Ramachandra Guha writes that the early 1980s were marked by a wave of violence between Hindus and Muslims. The BJP initially moderated the Hindu nationalist stance of its predecessor the Jana Sangh to gain a wider appeal, emphasising its links to the Janata Party and the ideology of Gandhian Socialism.[62] This was unsuccessful, as it won only two Lok Sabha seats in the elections of 1984.[62] The assassination of Indira Gandhi a few months earlier resulted in a wave of support for the Congress which won a record tally of 403 seats, contributing to the low number for the BJP.[63]

Ram Janmabhoomi movement
Main article: Ram Rath Yatra
Further information: Ayodhya dispute and Demolition of the Babri Masjid

Ram Rath Yatra
The failure of Vajpayee's moderate strategy led to a shift in the ideology of the party toward a policy of more hardline Hindu nationalism.[62][64] In 1984, Advani was appointed president of the party, and under him it became the political voice of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement. In the early 1980s, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) began a campaign for the construction of a temple dedicated to the Hindu deity Rama at the disputed site of the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya. The mosque had been constructed by the Mughal Emperor Babur in 1527. There is a dispute about whether a temple once stood there.[65] The agitation was on the basis of the belief that the site is the birthplace of Rama, and that a temple had been demolished to construct the mosque.[66] The BJP threw its support behind this campaign and made it a part of their election platform. It won 86 Lok Sabha seats in 1989, a tally which made its support crucial to the National Front government of V. P. Singh.[67]

In September 1990, Advani began a rath yatra (chariot journey) to Ayodhya in support of the Ram temple movement. According to Guha, the imagery employed by the yatra was "religious, allusive, militant, masculine, and anti-Muslim", and the speeches delivered by Advani during the yatra accused the government of appeasing Muslims and practising "pseudo-secularism" that obstructed the legitimate aspirations of Hindus.[68] Advani defended the yatra, stating that it had been free of the incident from Somnath to Ayodhya, and that the English media were to blame for the violence that followed.[69] Advani was placed under preventive detention on the orders of the then Bihar chief minister Lalu Prasad Yadav. A large number of kar sevaks nonetheless converged at Ayodhya. On the orders of Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mulayam Singh Yadav, 150,000 of them were detained, yet half as many managed to reach Ayodhya and some attacked the mosque. Three days of fighting with the paramilitary forces ended with the deaths of several kar sevaks. Hindus were urged by VHP to "take revenge" for these deaths, resulting in riots against Muslims across Uttar Pradesh. [70] The BJP withdrew its support from the V.P. Singh government, leading to fresh general elections. It once again increased its tally, to 120 seats, and won a majority in the Uttar Pradesh assembly.[71]

On 6 December 1992, the RSS and its affiliates organised a rally involving more than 100,000 VHP and BJP activists at the site of the mosque.[71] Under circumstances that are not entirely clear, the rally developed into a frenzied attack that ended with the demolition of the mosque.[71] Over the following weeks, waves of violence between Hindus and Muslims erupted all over the country, killing over 2,000 people.[71] The government briefly banned the VHP, and many BJP leaders, including Advani were arrested for making inflammatory speeches provoking the demolition.[72][73] Several historians have said that the demolition was the product of a conspiracy by the Sangh Parivar, and not a spontaneous act.[71]

A 2009 report, authored by Justice Manmohan Singh Liberhan, found that 68 people were responsible for the demolition, mostly leaders from the BJP.[73] Among those named were Vajpayee, Advani, and Murli Manohar Joshi. The report also criticised Kalyan Singh, Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh during the demolition.[73] He was accused of posting bureaucrats and police officers who would stay silent during the demolition.[73] Anju Gupta, an Indian Police Service officer in charge of Advani's security, appeared as a prominent witness before the commission. She said that Advani and Joshi made provocative speeches that were a major factor in the mob's behaviour.[74] However in a Judgement on 30 September 2020,the Supreme Court of India acquitted all of the accused in the demolition including Advani and Joshi.[75]

In the parliamentary elections in 1996, the BJP capitalised on the communal polarisation that followed the demolition to win 161 Lok Sabha seats, making it the largest party in parliament.[46] Vajpayee was sworn in as Prime Minister but was unable to attain a majority in the Lok Sabha, forcing the government to resign after 13 days.[46]

NDA government (1998–2004)
Further information: National Democratic Alliance
A coalition of regional parties formed the government in 1996, but this grouping was short-lived, and mid-term polls were held in 1998. The BJP contested the elections leading a coalition called the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), which contained its existing allies like the Samata Party, the Shiromani Akali Dal, the Shiv Sena in addition to the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) and the Biju Janata Dal. Among these regional parties, the Shiv Sena was the only one that had an ideology similar to the BJP; Amartya Sen, for example, called the coalition an "ad hoc" grouping.[76][77] The NDA had a majority with outside support from the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) and Vajpayee returned as Prime Minister.[78] However, the coalition ruptured in May 1999 when the leader of AIADMK, Jayalalitha, withdrew her support, and fresh elections were held again.[79]

On 13 October 1999, the NDA, without the AIADMK, won 303 seats in parliament and thus an outright majority. The BJP had its highest ever tally of 183. Vajpayee became Prime Minister for the third time; Advani became Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister. This NDA government lasted its full term of five years. Its policy agenda included a more aggressive stance on defence and terror as well as neo-liberal economic policies.[47]

In 2001, Bangaru Laxman, then the BJP president, was filmed accepting a bribe of ₹100,000 (equivalent to ₹340,000 or US$4,500 in 2020)[80] to recommend the purchase of hand-held thermal imagers for the Indian Army to the Defence Ministry, in a sting operation by Tehelka journalists.[81][82] The BJP was forced to make him resign and he was subsequently prosecuted. In April 2012, he was sentenced to four years in prison.[83]

2002 Gujarat violence
Main article: 2002 Gujarat violence
On 27 February 2002, a train carrying Hindu pilgrims was burned outside the town of Godhra, killing 59 people. The incident was seen as an attack upon Hindus, and sparked off massive anti-Muslim violence across the state of Gujarat that lasted several weeks.[84] The death toll estimated was as high as 2000, while 150,000 were displaced.[85] Rape, mutilation, and torture were also widespread.[85][86] The then-Gujarat chief minister Narendra Modi and several high-ranking government officials were accused of initiating and condoning the violence, as were police officers who allegedly directed the rioters and gave them lists of Muslim-owned properties.[87] In April 2009, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) was appointed by the Supreme Court to investigate and expedite the Gujarat riots cases. In 2012, Modi was cleared of complicity in the violence by the SIT. BJP MLA Maya Kodnani, who later held a cabinet portfolio in the Modi government, was convicted of having orchestrated one of the riots and sentenced to 28 years imprisonment;[88][89] she was later acquitted by the Gujarat High Court.[90] Scholars such as Paul Brass, Martha Nussbaum and Dipankar Gupta have said that there was a high level of state complicity in the incidents.[91][92][93]

General election defeats
Vajpayee called for early elections in 2004, six months ahead of schedule. The NDA's campaign was based on the slogan "India Shining", which sought to depict it as responsible for a rapid economic transformation of the country.[94] However, the NDA unexpectedly suffered a heavy defeat, winning only 186 seats in the Lok Sabha, compared to the 222 of the Congress and its allies. Manmohan Singh succeeded Vajpayee as Prime Minister as the head of the United Progressive Alliance. The NDA's failure to reach out to rural Indians was provided as an explanation for its defeat, as was its divisive policy agenda.[94][95]

In May 2008, the BJP won the state elections in Karnataka. This was the first time that the party won assembly elections in any South Indian state. In the 2009 general elections, its strength in the Lok Sabha was reduced to 116 seats. It lost the Karnataka assembly election in 2013.[96]

NDA government (2014–present)

Narendra Modi became the Prime Minister of India, following the 2014 Indian general election.
In the 2014 Indian general election, the BJP won 282 seats, leading the NDA to a tally of 336 seats in the 543-seat Lok Sabha.[97] Narendra Modi was sworn in as the 14th Prime Minister of India on 26 May 2014.[98][99]

The vote share of the BJP was 31% of all votes cast, a low figure relative to the number of seats it won.[100] This was the first instance since 1984 of a single party achieving an outright majority in the Indian Parliament[101] and the first time that it achieved a majority in the Lok Sabha on its own strength. Support was concentrated in the Hindi-speaking belt in North-central India.[100] The magnitude of the victory was not predicted by most opinion and exit polls.[100]

Political analysts have suggested several reasons for this victory, including the popularity of Modi, and the loss of support for the Congress due to the corruption scandals in its previous term.[102] The BJP was also able to expand its traditionally upper-caste, upper-class support base and received significant support from middle-class and Dalit people, as well as among Other Backward Classes.[103][100] Its support among Muslims remained low; only 8% of Muslim voters voted for the BJP.[103][100] The BJP was also very successful at mobilising its supporters and raising voter turnout among them.[100]

In 2019, the BJP won the general election with a majority. Soon after coming to power, on 5 August 2019, the Modi administration revoked the special status, or limited autonomy, granted under Article 370 of the Indian Constitution to Jammu and Kashmir—a region administered by India as a state and this states consists of the larger part of Kashmir which has been the subject of dispute among India, Pakistan, and China since 1947.[104][105]

Later in 2019, the Modi government introduced the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, which was passed by the Parliament of India on 11 December 2019. It amended the Citizenship Act, 1955 by providing a path to Indian citizenship for illegal immigrant of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi, and Christian religious minorities, who had fled persecution from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan before December 2014.[106][107] Muslims from those countries were not given such eligibility.[108] The act was the first time religion had been overtly used as a criterion for citizenship under Indian law

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), English Indian People’s Party, pro-Hindu political party of postindependence India. The party has enjoyed broad support among members of the higher castes and in northern India. It has attempted to attract support from lower castes, particularly through the appointment of several lower-caste members to prominent party positions.

Origin and establishment
The BJP traces its roots to the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS; Indian People’s Association), which was established in 1951 as the political wing of the pro-Hindu group Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS; “National Volunteers Corps”) by Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. The BJS advocated the rebuilding of India in accordance with Hindu culture and called for the formation of a strong unified state.

India: The first and second BJP governments
Despite a booming national economy, the Congress Party—the “(I)” was by then dropped—polled poorly in the 1996 general election, falling...
In 1967 the BJS gained a substantial foothold in the Hindi-speaking regions of northern India. Ten years later the party, led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, joined three other political parties to form the Janata Party and took over the reins of government. Plagued by factionalism and internal disputes, however, the government collapsed in July 1979. The BJP was formally established in 1980, following a split by dissidents within the Janata coalition, whose leaders wanted to prohibit elected BJS officials from participating in the RSS. (Critics of the RSS have consistently accused it of political and religious extremism, particularly because one of its members had assassinated Mahatma Gandhi.) The BJS subsequently reorganized itself as the BJP under the leadership of Vajpayee, Lal Krishan Advani, and Murali Manohar Joshi.

The BJP advocated Hindutva (“Hindu-ness”), an ideology that sought to define Indian culture in terms of Hindu values, and it was highly critical of the secular policies and practices of the Indian National Congress (Congress Party). The BJP began to have electoral success in 1989, when it capitalized on anti-Muslim feeling by calling for the erection of a Hindu temple in an area in Ayodhya considered sacred by Hindus but at that time occupied by the Babri Masjid (Mosque of Bābur). By 1991 the BJP had considerably increased its political appeal, capturing 117 seats in the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) and taking power in four states.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now
The demolition of the Babri Masjid in December 1992 by organizations seen to be associated with the BJP caused a major backlash against the party. The mosque’s destruction also led to violence throughout the country that left more than 1,000 dead. The party was regarded with skepticism and suspicion by many committed to secularism in contemporary India. To alleviate fear among the public, restore confidence in the party, and expand its base, the BJP’s leaders undertook a series of rath yatras (“journeys on the carriage”), or political marches, in which the Hindu god Rama was symbolically invoked as the symbol of cultural renaissance.

Electoral success and the National Democratic Alliance government
In elections in 1996 the BJP emerged as the largest single party in the Lok Sabha and was invited by India’s president to form a government. However, its tenure in office was short-lived, as it could not muster the majority required to rule in the 545-member lower house. In 1998 the BJP and its allies were able to form a majority government with Vajpayee as prime minister. In May of that year, nuclear weapons tests ordered by Vajpayee drew widespread international condemnation. After 13 months in office, coalition partner All India Dravidian Progressive Federation (All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazagham) withdrew its support, and Vajpayee was prompted to seek a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha, which he lost by the margin of a single vote.

The BJP contested the 1999 parliamentary elections as the organizer of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), a coalition of more than 20 national and regional parties. The alliance secured a governing majority, with the BJP winning 182 of the coalition’s 294 seats. Vajpayee, as leader of the largest party in the alliance, was again elected prime minister. Although Vajpayee sought to resolve the country’s long-standing conflict with Pakistan over the Kashmir region and made India a world leader in information technology, the coalition lost its majority in the 2004 parliamentary elections to the Congress Party’s United Progressive Alliance (UPA) coalition, and Vajpayee resigned from office. The party’s share of seats in the Lok Sabha was reduced from 137 to 116 in the 2009 parliamentary elections, as the UPA coalition again prevailed.

Return to power
As the 2014 Lok Sabha elections grew near, however, the BJP’s fortunes began to rise, largely because of growing discontent with Congress Party rule. Narendra Modi, the longtime chief minister (head of government) of Gujarat state, was chosen to lead the BJP electoral campaign, thus making him the party’s candidate for prime minister. The polling—held in several stages in April and May—produced an overwhelming victory for the BJP. The party won 282 seats outright, a clear majority in the chamber, and its NDA partners added 54 more. Shortly after election results were announced, Modi was named head of the party members in parliament, and he began forming a government that included not only senior BJP officials but also several leaders from parties allied with the coalition. Modi was sworn in as prime minister on May 26, 2014.


Courtesy of Press Information Bureau, Government of India
BJP rule included a mixture of policies relating to the economy and to promoting Hindutva. On November 8, 2016, 500- and 1,000-rupee banknotes were demonetized with just a few hours’ notice with the intent of stopping “black money”—cash used for illicit activities. More than 99 percent of the banknotes were returned and replaced, indicating even “black money” had been successfully exchanged and returned to circulation. But the policy did broaden the income tax base through increased bank activity and stimulated the use of cashless transactions. In 2017 the Goods and Services Tax (GST) was introduced, reforming the collection of consumption taxes nationwide. Meanwhile, the BJP appealed to notions of Hindutva through measures such as banning the sale of cows for slaughter, a move later overturned by the Supreme Court. The party likewise legislated name changes for certain jurisdictions.

As both unemployment and the cost of living continued to rise and Modi’s grandiose promises on economic growth remained unfulfilled, the BJP began suffering local election losses. In 2018 the party lost all five state elections held in November and December, including those in its strongholds of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh. On the national level, however, the party was able to pull off a landslide victory in April–May 2019 and even expanded its representation in the Lok Sabha. This was in part due to the support it gained after the government’s handling of a security crisis in Jammu and Kashmir in February 2019. Moreover, Congress, the BJP’s most viable competitor, failed to portray itself as a worthwhile alternative to the BJP-led government. Later that year, though, the BJP lost control of Maharashtra state after losing the support of a prominent regional party.

The party’s second term in power was marked by swift and heavy-handed actions. In August 2019 the BJP-led government stripped Jammu and Kashmir of its autonomy and in October brought the former state under the direct control of the union government. Communications and movement in the territory were severely restricted during the transition. In March 2020 the spread of the global COVID-19 pandemic prompted the government to implement a strict national lockdown until June. As restrictions were eased, the BJP made efforts to counter the economic impact of the pandemic. Those efforts included Modi’s use of executive action to reduce obstacles to selling produce and to encourage private investment. Critics argued that the changes would make farmers vulnerable to exploitation, but the reforms were nevertheless codified into law without input from those concerned. Protests against the measures escalated in January 2021 (including clashes with police and the storming of the Red Fort on Republic Day), and the government took extraordinary measures to stifle them, implementing Internet blackouts and punishing organizers, participants, and journalists. Nevertheless, opposition to the reforms was sustained into November, and the BJP, wary of losing support in upcoming state elections, announced that they would be repealed.


India: The first and second BJP governments
Despite a booming national economy, the Congress Party—the “(I)” was by then dropped—polled poorly in the 1996 general election, falling from 260 seats in the Lok Sabha to only 140 (at that point…
India
India: Return of the BJP under Narendra Modi
Although the BJP was not immune to scandal—including accusations of an illegal mining scam in Karnataka state—it was able to capitalize on the Congress Party’s declining fortunes and improve its own political chances for the 2014 Lok Sabha elections. In 2013…
India
India: The premiership of Rajiv Gandhi
…opposition parties, including the right-wing Bharatiya Janata (“Indian People’s”) Party (BJP), headed by Lal Krishna Advani, and V.P. Singh’s new Janata Dal (JD; “People’s Party”) coalition. In the general elections held in November, Gandhi barely managed to retain his own Lok Sabha seat, as the Congress (I) Party, winning only…
Rajnath Singh
Home
Politics, Law & Government
World Leaders
Other Politicians
Rajnath Singh
Indian politician

Rajnath Singh, (born July 10, 1951, Chandauli, Uttar Pradesh, India), Indian politician and government official, who became a major figure in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP; Indian People’s Party). A soft-spoken man who generally kept a low public profile, he was one of the party’s staunchest advocates of its Hindutva ideology, which sought to define Indian culture in terms of Hindu values. His rise to the top ranks within the party was lauded as demonstrating the BJP’s democratic strength.

Singh was raised in a farming family in southeastern Uttar Pradesh in northern India. He earned a master’s degree in physics from Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur, and embarked on a teaching career as a lecturer of physics at the K.B. Postgraduate College in Mirzapur. His affiliations with Hindu right-wing organizations began during his student days. Singh joined the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) when he was 13 years old. Between 1969 and 1971 he was the organizational secretary of the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (the student wing of the RSS) in Gorakhpur. He became the general secretary of the RSS’s Mirzapur branch in 1972.

Singh entered into active politics two years later, when he became a member of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (Indian People’s Association), then the political wing of the RSS and precursor to the BJP. He was arrested in 1975 during the state of emergency declared by then-prime minister Indira Gandhi and was held in detention until 1977. Following his release that year, he was elected to the lower chamber of the Uttar Pradesh state legislature in his first run for public office. The BJP was established in 1980, and three years later Singh was named secretary of the party in Uttar Pradesh. In 1984 he became the state president of the BJP’s youth wing, Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM; Indian People’s Youth Movement). In 1986 he became the BJYM’s national general secretary, and in 1988 he was appointed as the organization’s national president.

Singh was elected to the upper chamber of the state legislature in 1988. Three years later he became the state’s minister of education, after the BJP had achieved a majority in elections to the assembly. While he was serving in that office, the party undertook a controversial program of rewriting portions of history and mathematics textbooks to reflect a more religious viewpoint. Also controversial during Singh’s tenure was the enactment of a law in 1992 intended to prevent cheating during the school and college examinations; the resulting lower graduation rates and public arrests of a large number of alleged cheaters sparked protests, and the law was later repealed.
Singh’s political career moved back and forth between state and national politics, interspersed with leadership roles within the BJP. He became a member of the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of the Indian parliament) in 1994. In 1997 he was appointed president of the Uttar Pradesh branch of the BJP, and in late 1999 he was back in New Delhi as the minister of Surface Transport under the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government. During his brief time with the ministry, an ambitious program was unveiled to expand the national highway network to better link India’s major urban areas.

In 2000 Singh became the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, succeeding veteran leader Ram Prakash Gupta. His tenure in office lasted less than a year and a half, however, as he was forced to step down in early 2002 after the BJP lost control of the government in state assembly elections. He then moved back to the national stage. In 2003 he was appointed minister of agriculture (later agriculture and food processing), remaining there until the NDA lost control of the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) in 2004.

Singh was elected president of the BJP in December 2005 (taking office at the beginning of January 2006), with the stated purpose of bringing the party more into line with Hindutva principles—which sometimes put him at odds with the more-moderate members the party had recruited. He stepped down from the post in late 2009 after the party’s relatively poor showing in national parliamentary elections that year, although he won a seat in the Lok Sabha. He was again elected president of the BJP in early 2013, succeeding Nitin Gadkari, who had replaced him in 2009. Singh remained focused on religious issues—for example, staunchly advocating that a Hindu temple be built on the site of the 16th-century Babri Masjid (“Mosque of Bābur”) in Ayodhya that had been illegally demolished in 1992 by Hindu activists. He also stirred up controversy in 2013 when he stated that the use of English in India was undermining the country’s cultural values. Singh easily retained a seat in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections—part of a landslide BJP victory—and joined the cabinet of Prime Minister Narendra Modi as minister of home affairs. He held that post until 2019, when he became minister of defense.

rally for the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Bharatiya Janata Party
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), pro-Hindu political party of postindependence India. The party has enjoyed broad support among members of the higher castes and in northern India. It has attempted to attract support from lower castes, particularly through the appointment of several lower-caste members to prominent party…
Ravana, the 10-headed demon king, detail from a Guler painting of the Ramayana, c. 1720.
Hinduism
Hinduism, major world religion originating on the Indian subcontinent and comprising several and varied systems of philosophy, belief, and ritual. Although the name Hinduism is relatively new, having been coined by British writers in the first decades of the 19th century, it refers to a rich cumulative tradition of texts…
Yashwant Sinha
Politics, Law & Government
World Leaders
Other Politicians
Yashwant Sinha
Indian bureaucrat, politician, and government official
   
BY Shanthie Mariet D'Souza | Last Updated: Nov 2, 2021 | View Edit History
Sinha, Yashwant
Born: November 6, 1937 (age 84) Patna Patna India
Political Affiliation: Bharatiya Janata Party
Yashwant Sinha, (born November 6, 1937, Patna, India), Indian bureaucrat, politician, and government official who rose to become a leading figure in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of India and twice served (1990–91 and 1998–2004) as a cabinet minister in the Indian government.

Sinha was raised in a middle-class family in Patna in what is now west-central Bihar state in eastern India. In 1958 he completed an M.A. degree in political science from Patna University and stayed at the university to teach that discipline for two years. In 1960 Sinha joined the Indian Administrative Service (IAS; civil service), and in a career that lasted for 24 years he held several posts in Bihar as well as in New Delhi (the national capital) and overseas. Among his positions were two in what was then West Germany—as first secretary (commercial) in the Indian embassy in Bonn (1971–73) and then as Indian consul general in Frankfurt am Main (1973–74)—and, back in India, joint secretary in the Ministry of Transport and Shipping (1980–84).

During his years as a bureaucrat, Sinha learned of the political theories of the Indian socialist leader Jaya Prakash Narayan. By 1984 Sinha had decided to leave the IAS and to involve himself in politics as a member of the Janata (People’s) Party (JP), of which Narayan had been a mentor. Within two years Sinha was the party’s general secretary, and three years later he was named general secretary of the Janata Dal (JD), after that party had been formed from the JP. In 1990 Sinha joined the Janata Dal (Socialist) of Chandra Shekhar, following a split in the JD, but within a few years he shifted his loyalties to the BJP. In June 1996 he was appointed a national spokesperson of that party, and he served in that capacity until June 2005.

Sinha’s legislative career was launched with his election to a seat in the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of the Indian parliament) in 1988. He served in the cabinet of Prime Minister Shekhar’s short-lived government (November 1990–June 1991) as the minister of finance. In 1995 Sinha was elected to the Bihar state legislative assembly as a BJP candidate, and he served there as the leader of the opposition until 1996.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now
In 1998 Sinha won a seat in the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) and was appointed finance minister in the cabinet of the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government. He was reelected to the Lok Sabha in the 1999 polls and continued as finance minister until 2002. During his tenure in the ministry, Sinha’s initiatives included lowering bank interest rates, introducing a tax deduction for mortgage interest, and deregulating the petroleum industry. He remained in the NDA government in 2002–04 as the minister for external affairs, but he lost his seat in the 2004 Lok Sabha elections. He soon returned to the parliament, however, by winning reelection to the Rajya Sabha later that year. He served in that chamber until 2009, when he regained a seat in the Lok Sabha.

By 2009, however, Sinha had found himself on the margins of the BJP’s affairs. Following the party’s overall poor showing in the Lok Sabha elections that year, he resigned from the post of BJP’s vice president, a post he had held for two years. Considered close to BJP leader Lal Krishna Advani, Sinha was sidelined by the party president Nitin Gadkari. In 2012, in a sign of rebellion, Sinha supported Pranab Mukherjee, the candidate of the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) for the post of the country’s president. He found himself excluded from the BJP’s core team in 2013, although he continued to be a member of BJP’s 80-member National Executive Committee. Sinha chose not to contest the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, instead making way for his son Jayant Sinha, who was elected from his old constituency in Jharkhand. In 2018 the senior Sinha left the BJP, claiming that the party’s leadership, especially Prime Minister Narendra Modi, was threatening democracy.

Yashwant Sinha was the author of Confessions of a Swadeshi Reformer: My Years as Finance Minister (2007).
rally for the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Bharatiya Janata Party
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), pro-Hindu political party of postindependence India. The party has enjoyed broad support among members of the higher castes and in northern India. It has attempted to attract support from lower castes, particularly through the appointment of several lower-caste members to prominent party…
India, country that occupies the greater part of South Asia. Its capital is New Delhi, built in the 20th century just south of the historic hub of Old Delhi to serve as India’s administrative centre. Its government is a constitutional republic that represents a highly diverse population consisting of thousands…
Patna Museum


Born: December 28, 1952 New Delhi India
Died: August 24, 2019 (aged 66) New Delhi India
Title / Office: Rajya Sabha (2009-2014), India
Political Affiliation: Bharatiya Janata Party
Arun Jaitley, (born December 28, 1952, New Delhi, India—died August 24, 2019, New Delhi), Indian lawyer, politician, and government official who served as leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of the Indian parliament) in 2009–14. In 2014 he joined the cabinet of the BJP-led government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Jaitley was known as an eloquent speaker, and his political and professional career was largely noncontroversial.

Jaitley was born and raised in New Delhi, and his father was a successful lawyer. Jaitley completed a bachelor’s degree in commerce in 1973 and received a law degree in 1977, both from the University of Delhi. During his time at the university, he became a member of the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), the student wing of the pro-Hindu organization Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). In 1974 he was elected president of the student union at the university. He participated in demonstrations against the imposition of the state of emergency in 1975 by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, was arrested, and was held in detention for 19 months.

In 1977 Jaitley became the national convener of the Loktantrik Yova Morcha youth organization, which campaigned for Janata Party candidates that year. He joined the BJP after its formation in 1980. His career as a politician and a lawyer progressed simultaneously together. He served as additional solicitor general in the BJP-led government in 1989–90, during which time he was involved in some of the investigations into the scandal involving a Swedish weapons manufacturer accused of paying bribes to several high profile personalities, including Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi.

In 1991 Jaitley was included in the BJP’s national executive, the top decision-making body of the party. Prior to the 1999 parliamentary elections, he was appointed as the party’s spokesperson, a position he also held (along with the post of party general secretary) for several months in 2002–03. He served in a variety of ministerial posts in the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) coalition government (1999–2004), including minister of Law, Justice, and Company Affairs and minister of Commerce and Industry. After the NDA lost power in the 2004 elections, Jaitley was appointed as the BJP’s general secretary.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now
Jaitley was first elected to the Rajya Sabha in 2000, representing the state of Gujarat, and he was reelected in 2006 and 2012. During his first term he introduced bills for two amendments to the Indian constitution: the first (enacted in 2002) froze the number of seats in parliament until the year 2026 based on districting in the 1991 national census, and the second (2004) imposed penalties on members of parliament who defected from one party to another during their terms and limited the number of members of state ministry councils. In 2009 he was chosen as the leader of the BJP opposition in the upper house. He ceased practicing law following the appointment. In addition to his other duties, he served as the party’s campaign manager in several states over the years.

Jaitley unsuccessfully ran for a seat from Punjab state in the 2014 elections to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament). Nonetheless, following the overwhelming BJP landslide victory at the polls, Jaitley was given responsibility for three important portfolios in Prime Minister Modi’s cabinet: defense, finance, and corporate affairs. In addition, Jaitley switched his role in the Rajya Sabha from leader of the opposition to leader of the house. Later in 2014, however, he stepped down as minister of defense, though he subsequently held the post in 2017. Despite a sweeping victory for the BJP in the 2019 elections, Jaitley announced that he would not serve in Modi’s second government due to his deteriorating health. He died months later in August.

In 2020 he was posthumously awarded the Padma Vibhushan, one of India’s highest civilian honours.

Bibhu Prasad Routray
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
rally for the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Bharatiya Janata Party
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), pro-Hindu political party of postindependence India. The party has enjoyed broad support among members of the higher castes and in northern India. It has attempted to attract support from lower castes, particularly through the appointment of several lower-caste members to prominent party…
Rajya Sabha
Rajya Sabha, (Hindi: “Council of States”) the upper house of India’s bicameral legislature. The Rajya Sabha was designed by the framers of the Indian constitution as a check on the power of the Lok Sabha (“House of the People”), the legislature’s lower house. It represents the interests of the states…

Narendra Modi, Indian politician and government official who rose to become a senior leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). In 2014 he led his party to victory in elections to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian…
Vasundhara Raje
Politics, Law & Government
World Leaders
Other Politicians
Vasundhara Raje
Indian politician
Alternate titles: Vasundhara Raje Scindia
   
BY Shanthie Mariet D'Souza | View Edit History
See all media
Born: March 8, 1953 (age 68) Mumbai India
Title / Office: minister (2013-2018), Rajasthan minister (2003-2008), Rajasthan Lok Sabha (1989-2003), India
Political Affiliation: Bharatiya Janata Party
Vasundhara Raje, original name in full Vasundhara Raje Scindia, (born March 8, 1953, Bombay [now Mumbai], India), Indian politician and government official, who rose to become a senior leader in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). She twice served (2003–08 and 2013–18) as the chief minister (head of government) of Rajasthan state in northwestern India.

Raje was born into the wealthy Scindia (Sindhia) royal family, former rulers of Gwalior (now in Madhya Pradesh state). Her father, Jivajirao Scindia, died when she was young. She derived much inspiration from her mother, Vijayaraje (or Vijaya Raje) Scindia, who was a senior leader in both the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS; Indian People’s Association) and the BJP, the successor of the BJS. Raje’s older brother, Madhavrao Scindia, was also a prominent politician—though of the rival Indian National Congress (Congress Party)—before his death in 2001. Raje completed a bachelor’s degree in economics and political science from Sophia College for Women (affiliated with the University of Mumbai) in Mumbai.

Meet extraordinary women who dared to bring gender equality and other issues to the forefront. From overcoming oppression, to breaking rules, to reimagining the world or waging a rebellion, these women of history have a story to tell.
In 1972 Raje married Hemant Singh, head of the Dhaulpur (Dholpur) princely family in Rajasthan. The two separated soon after the birth of a son, but she remained in Rajasthan. Raje began her political career in 1984 as a member of the National Executive of the relatively young BJP (established 1980) and rose steadily within the party hierarchy. In 1985 she was appointed vice president of the BJP’s youth wing in Rajasthan, and two years later she became vice president of the party’s state unit. She served in 1997–98 as joint secretary of the BJP membership in parliament and in 2002–03 as president of the party’s Rajasthan unit.

Raje first ran for elected office in 1985, winning a seat in the Rajasthan state legislative assembly. Four years later, however, she shifted her focus to national politics and was elected to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) in 1989. She was reelected to that body four more times, ending her tenure there in 2003. Raje received several appointments during the period (1998–2004) that the BJP controlled the national government, including minister of state for external affairs (1998–99) and for the Department of Atomic Energy (1999–2003).

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now
In 2003 Raje returned to Rajasthan state politics and led the BJP to a strong electoral victory (120 out of 200 seats) in the legislative assembly. The party formed a government, with Raje appointed chief minister, the first woman to occupy that position in Rajasthan. Her term in office (2003–08) was marked by a strong focus on improving the state’s infrastructure (notably constructing more roads, canals, and power stations) and various social initiatives (including greater educational opportunities for the state’s youth). In recognition of her work toward empowering women in the state—especially by promoting self-help groups and facilitating the establishment of microcredit programs—the United Nations gave her its Women Together Award in 2007.

The five-year period of BJP rule in the state, however, was also marked by incidents of caste violence (notably in 2007 and 2008) and by the opposition of local leaders (particularly from the Gurjar [or Gurjjar] and Meena castes) to Raje’s firm style of governing. Those issues gradually weakened the BJP’s hold over voters belonging to those castes and contributed to the party’s poor performance in the 2008 state assembly elections. The BJP’s seat total was reduced to 78, and the Congress Party was able to form a coalition government.

Raje retained her seat in the assembly, and for most of the succeeding five years she was the leader of the opposition there—the only significant break being in 2010–11, when she served as the BJP’s general secretary. She was again chosen to lead the BJP campaign when it contested for the December 2013 state assembly polls. The party won by a landslide, capturing 163 seats, and Raje began her second term as chief minister. In the 2018 elections the BJP lost control of the assembly and her chief ministership ended, though she retained her seat.

Shanthie Mariet D'Souza

Rajasthan: History of Rajasthan
Notable is the BJP’s Vasundhara Raje, the state’s first female chief minister, who was elected to that office in 2003 (serving until 2008) and again in 2013.…
rally for the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Bharatiya Janata Party
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), pro-Hindu political party of postindependence India. The party has enjoyed broad support among members of the higher castes and in northern India. It has attempted to attract support from lower castes, particularly through the appointment of several lower-caste members to prominent party…
Rajasthan, India
Rajasthan
Rajasthan, state of northwestern India, located in the northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent. It is bounded to the north and northeast by the states of Punjab and Haryana, to the east and southeast by the states of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, to the southwest by the state of…
Ram Nath Kovind

   
Ram Nath Kovind, (born October 1, 1945, Paraukh, Uttar Pradesh state, India), Indian lawyer and politician who served as president of India (2017– ). He was the second person from the Dalit caste, after Kocheril Raman Narayanan, and the first member of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) to hold the office.

Kovind grew up in humble circumstances in a small agrarian village where his father farmed and ran a small grocery store. His mother died when he was a young child. After earning degrees in commerce and law from Kanpur University, he moved to Delhi in order to take the civil services examination. Although he passed, Kovind chose to begin practicing law and was admitted to the bar in 1971.

Kovind worked in the Delhi Free Legal Aid Society, and he also served (1971–75, 1981) as general secretary of the Akhil Bharatiya Koli Samaj, an organization serving the interests of the Koli community, a Dalit subcaste. From 1977 to 1979 he was a union government advocate in the Delhi High Court, and in 1978 he became an advocate-on-record of India’s Supreme Court. In 1980 Kovind advanced to the position of union government standing counsel in the Supreme Court, and he practiced there until 1993. In addition, he served (1977–78) as the executive assistant to Prime Minister Morarji Desai.

In 1991 Kovind joined the BJP, and three years later he was elected to the Rajya Sabha (the upper house of India’s parliament) from Uttar Pradesh. During his 12 years in that body, he served on various committees, including those on law and justice, social justice and empowerment, and welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. He was part of the Indian delegation to the United Nations and spoke before the General Assembly in 2002. In 2015 Kovind was appointed governor of the state of Bihar. His nonconfrontational approach to political problems earned him praise across the political spectrum. Among his notable achievements as governor was the creation of a judicial commission to investigate corruption in universities.

In June 2017 the BJP announced Kovind as the party’s candidate to succeed Pranab Mukherjee in the ceremonial office of president. He faced Meira Kumar, former speaker of the Lok Sabha (the lower house), and herself a Dalit. In spite of the fact that his low-key profile made him relatively unknown, he won nearly two-thirds of the vote.

Kovind was sworn in as India’s 14th president in July 2017. Through the promulgation of presidential orders in August 2019, he was instrumental in the revocation of the autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir state (now Jammu and Kashmir union territory and Ladakh union territory).

Meira Kumar

India, country that occupies the greater part of South Asia. Its capital is New Delhi, built in the 20th century just south of the historic hub of Old Delhi to serve as India’s administrative centre. Its government is a constitutional republic that represents a highly diverse population consisting of thousands…
caste system of India
untouchable
untouchable, in traditional Indian society, the former name for any member of a wide range of low-caste Hindu groups and any person outside the caste system. The use of the term and the social disabilities associated with it were declared illegal in…
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
Lifestyles & Social Issues
Sociology & Society
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
Hindu organization
Alternate titles: National Volunteers Corps, RSS, Rashtriya Seva Sangh
   
BY The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica | View Edit History
Date: 1925 - present
Areas Of Involvement: Hindutva Hinduism
Related People: Rajnath Singh Narendra Modi
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), (Hindi: “National Volunteer Organization”) also called Rashtriya Seva Sangh, organization founded in 1925 by Keshav Baliram Hedgewar (1889–1940), a physician living in the Maharashtra region of India, as part of the movement against British rule and as a response to rioting between Hindus and Muslims.

Hedgewar was heavily influenced by the writings of the Hindu nationalist ideologue Vinayak Damodar Savarkar and adopted much of his rhetoric concerning the need for the creation of a “Hindu nation.” Hedgewar formed the RSS as a disciplined cadre consisting mostly of upper-caste Brahmins who were dedicated to independence and the protection of Hindu political, cultural, and religious interests. Upon Hedgewar’s death, leadership of the group was assumed by Madhava Sadashiv Golwalkar and later by Madhhukar Dattatray Deoras.

The RSS presents itself as a cultural, not a political, organization that nevertheless advocates a Hindu nationalistic agenda under the banner of hindutva, or “Hindu-ness.” The group is structured hierarchically under the guidance of a national leader, while regional leaders are charged with overseeing the local branches. A major emphasis is placed on dedication and discipline, both mental and physical, as a means to restore strength, valor, and courage in Hindu youth and to foster unity among Hindus of all castes and classes. Paramilitary training and daily exercise and drills are part of this discipline. The RSS reveres Hanuman (in Hindu mythology, the commander of the monkey army) and in the organization’s early years made him the centre of its initiation ceremony.

The RSS has historically played a major role in the Hindu nationalist movement. On several occasions it has been banned by the Indian government, led by the Congress Party, for its alleged role in communal violence. Some of the major political leaders of India’s Bharatiya Janatā Party were or still are members of the RSS.
This article was most recently revised and updated by Adam Augustyn.
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
Jerry Falwell.
fundamentalism: Hindu fundamentalism
…Similarly, the name of the Rashtriya Swayamesevak Sangh (RSS), a “self-defense” force associated with the BJP, means “National Volunteers Corps.” Neither the BJP nor the RSS advocates the creation of a Hindu state. The principal concern of both groups is the danger posed to “the Hindu nation” by Islamic proselytization…
Narendra Modi
Narendra Modi: Early life and political career
He joined the pro-Hindu Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) organization in the early 1970s and set up a unit of the RSS’s students’ wing, the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad, in his area. Modi rose steadily in the RSS hierarchy, and his association with the organization significantly benefited his subsequent political…
rally for the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Bharatiya Janata Party: Origin and establishment
…wing of the pro-Hindu group Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS; “National Volunteers Corps”) by Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. The BJS advocated the rebuilding of India in accordance with Hindu culture and called for the formation of a strong unified state.…
Lal Krishna Advani

Political Affiliation: Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Janata Party
Lal Krishna Advani, (born November 8, 1927, Karachi, British India [now in Pakistan]), Indian politician who was a founding member of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and deputy prime minister of India (2002–04). He was largely responsible for popularizing and strengthening the BJP, which, from its formation in 1980, emerged as one of the strongest political forces in India.

After graduating from the D.G. National College in Hyderabad, Advani studied law at the Government Law College in Bombay (now Mumbai). He joined the militant Hindu group Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS; “National Volunteers Corps”) and took charge of its activities in Rajasthan in 1947. When Syama Prasad Mookerjee founded the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS; Indian People’s Association), the political wing of the RSS, in 1951, Advani became secretary of the party’s unit in Rajasthan. He held that position until 1970, when he moved to the Delhi unit.

In 1970 Advani became a member of the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of India’s parliament, a seat that he held until 1989. He was elected president of the BJS in 1973 and continued at the helm until 1977. Advani relinquished the post when he was appointed information and broadcasting minister in the Janata Party, a coalition of several major parties opposed to the period of national emergency that had been declared in 1975, headed by Morarji Desai. During his ministerial tenure, he abolished press censorship, repealed all antipress legislation enacted during the period of national emergency, and institutionalized reforms to safeguard the freedom of the media.

Following the collapse of the Desai government and subsequent breakdown of the BJS, a large number of the party’s members—led by Advani and Atal Bihari Vajpayee—formed a new political party, the pro-Hindu BJP, in 1980. To popularize the party and publicize its agenda, Advani undertook a series of rath yatras (political tours), traversing the country in the 1990s. Working to broaden its electoral base, the party adopted a more moderate, secular agenda in the mid-1990s. This strategy was largely responsible for the BJP’s success in the parliamentary elections in 1998 and 1999. That success extended to Advani personally as he was elected to the Lok Sabha (the lower house) in 1998, representing Gandhinagar, Gujarat.
Appointed twice (1998 and 1999) as the union home minister in the BJP-led coalition government, Advani was named deputy prime minister in 2002. Following his party’s defeat in the general elections of 2004, he became the leader of the opposition in the Lok Sabha. Advani ran as his party’s prime ministerial candidate in the 2009 general election. He resigned his cabinet position following the party’s defeat. In 2019 the BJP did not list him as a candidate for his Lok Sabha seat, and he left office later that year.
India
India: V.P. Singh’s coalition—its brief rise and fall
…Hindus marching toward Ayodhya, including Advani himself, who rode in a chariot such as Rama might have used. On October 23, the day that Advani was stopped and arrested, Singh lost his Lok Sabha majority, as the BJP withdrew its support for the coalition.…
rally for the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi
Bharatiya Janata Party
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), pro-Hindu political party of postindependence India. The party has enjoyed broad support among members of the higher castes and in northern India. It has attempted to attract support from lower castes, particularly through the appointment of several lower-caste members to prominent party…
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), (Hindi: “National Volunteer Organization”) organization founded in 1925 by Keshav Baliram Hedgewar (1889–1940), a physician living in the Maharashtra region of India, as part of the movement against British rule and as a response to rioting between Hindus and Muslims. Hedgewar was…
Narendra Modi
Born: September 17, 1950 (age 71) India
Title / Office: prime minister (2014-), India
Political Affiliation: Bharatiya Janata Party Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
Narendra Modi, in full Narendra Damodardas Modi, (born September 17, 1950, Vadnagar, India), Indian politician and government official who rose to become a senior leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). In 2014 he led his party to victory in elections to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament), after which he was sworn in as prime minister of India. Prior to that he had served (2001–14) as chief minister (head of government) of Gujarat state in western India.

Early life and political career
Modi was raised in a small town in northern Gujarat, and he completed an M.A. degree in political science from Gujarat University in Ahmadabad. He joined the pro-Hindu Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) organization in the early 1970s and set up a unit of the RSS’s students’ wing, the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad, in his area. Modi rose steadily in the RSS hierarchy, and his association with the organization significantly benefited his subsequent political career.

Modi joined the BJP in 1987, and a year later he was made the general secretary of the Gujarat branch of the party. He was instrumental in greatly strengthening the party’s presence in the state in succeeding years. In 1990 Modi was one of the BJP members who participated in a coalition government in the state, and he helped the BJP achieve success in the 1995 state legislative assembly elections that in March allowed the party to form the first-ever BJP-controlled government in India. The BJP’s control of the state government was relatively short-lived, however, ending in September 1996.

Political ascent and term as chief minister of Gujarat
In 1995 Modi was made the secretary of the BJP’s national organization in New Delhi, and three years later he was appointed its general secretary. He remained in that office for another three years, but in October 2001 he replaced the incumbent Gujarat chief minister, fellow BJP member Keshubhai Patel, after Patel had been held responsible for the state government’s poor response in the aftermath of the massive Bhuj earthquake in Gujarat earlier that year that killed more than 20,000 people. Modi entered his first-ever electoral contest in a February 2002 by-election that won him a seat in the Gujarat state assembly.


Modi’s political career thereafter remained a mixture of deep controversy and self-promoted achievements. His role as chief minister during communal riots that engulfed Gujarat in 2002 was particularly questioned. He was accused of condoning the violence or, at least, of doing little to stop the killing of more than 1,000 people, mostly Muslims, that ensued after dozens of Hindu passengers died when their train was set on fire in the city of Godhra. In 2005 the United States declined to issue him a diplomatic visa on the grounds that he was responsible for the 2002 riots, and the United Kingdom also criticized his role in 2002. Although in the succeeding years Modi himself escaped any indictment or censure—either by the judiciary or by investigative agencies—some of his close associates were found guilty of complicity in the 2002 events and received lengthy jail sentences. Modi’s administration was also accused of involvement in extrajudicial killings (variously termed “encounters” or “fake encounters”) by police or other authorities. One such case, in 2004, involved the deaths of a woman and three men whom officials said were members of Lashkar-e-Taiba (a Pakistan-based terrorist organization that was involved in the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks) and were alleged to have been plotting to assassinate Modi.

Modi’s repeated political success in Gujarat, however, made him an indispensable leader within the BJP hierarchy and led to his reintegration into the political mainstream. Under his leadership, the BJP secured a significant victory in the December 2002 legislative assembly elections, winning 127 of the 182 seats in the chamber (including a seat for Modi). Projecting a manifesto for growth and development in Gujarat, the BJP was again victorious in the 2007 state assembly elections, with a seat total of 117, and the party prevailed again in the 2012 polls, garnering 115 seats. Both times Modi won his contests and returned as chief minister.

During his time as head of the Gujarat government, Modi established a formidable reputation as an able administrator, and he was given credit for the rapid growth of the state’s economy. In addition, his and the party’s electoral performances helped advance Modi’s position as not only the most-influential leader within the party but also a potential candidate for prime minister of India. In June 2013 Modi was chosen the leader of the BJP’s campaign for the 2014 elections to the Lok Sabha.


After a vigorous campaign—in which Modi portrayed himself as a pragmatic candidate who could turn around India’s underperforming economy—he and the party were victorious, with the BJP winning a clear majority of seats in the chamber. Modi was sworn in as prime minister on May 26, 2014. Soon after he took office, his government embarked on several reforms, including campaigns to improve India’s transportation infrastructure and to liberalize rules on direct foreign investment in the country. Modi scored two significant diplomatic achievements early in his term. In mid-September he hosted a visit by Chinese President Xi Jinping, the first time a Chinese leader had been to India in eight years. At the end of that month, having been granted a U.S. visa, Modi made a highly successful visit to New York City, which included a meeting with U.S. Pres. Barack Obama.


Narendra Modi celebrating after his Bharatiya Janata Party won India's general election, 2014.
AP Images
As prime minister, Modi oversaw a promotion of Hindu culture and the implementation of economic reforms. The government undertook measures that would broadly appeal to Hindus, such as its attempt to ban the sale of cows for slaughter. The economic reforms were sweeping, introducing structural changes—and temporary disruptions—that could be felt nationwide. Among the most far-reaching was the demonetization and replacement of 500- and 1,000-rupee banknotes with only a few hours’ notice. The purpose was to stop “black money”—cash used for illicit activities—by making it difficult to exchange large sums of cash. The following year the government centralized the consumption tax system by introducing the Goods and Services Tax (GST), which superseded a confusing system of local consumption taxes and eliminated the problem of cascading tax. GDP growth slowed from these changes, though growth had already been high (8.2 percent in 2015), and the reforms succeeded in expanding the government’s tax base. Still, rising costs of living and increasing unemployment disappointed many as grandiose promises of economic growth remained unfulfilled.

This disappointment registered with voters during the elections in five states in late 2018. The BJP lost in all five states, including the BJP strongholds of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh. The rival Indian National Congress (Congress Party) won more state assembly seats than the BJP in all five elections. Many observers believed that this portended bad news for Modi and the BJP in the national elections set for the spring of 2019, but others believed that Modi’s charisma would excite the voters. Moreover, a security crisis in Jammu and Kashmir in February 2019, which escalated tensions with Pakistan to the highest point in decades, boosted Modi’s image just months before the election. With the BJP dominating the airwaves during the campaign—in contrast to the lacklustre campaign of Rahul Gandhi and Congress—the BJP was returned to power, and Modi became India’s first prime minister outside of the Congress Party to be reelected after a full term.

In his second term Modi’s government revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, stripping it of autonomy in October 2019 and bringing it under the direct control of the union government. The move came under intense criticism and faced challenges in court, not only for the questionable legality of depriving Jammu and Kashmir’s residents of self-determination but also because the government severely restricted communications and movement within the region.

In March 2020, meanwhile, Modi took decisive action to combat the outbreak of COVID-19 in India, swiftly implementing strict nationwide restrictions to mitigate the spread while the country’s biotechnology firms became key players in the race to develop and deliver vaccines worldwide. As part of the effort to counter the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, Modi undertook executive action in June to liberalize the agricultural sector, a move that was codified into law in September. Many feared that the reforms would make farmers vulnerable to exploitation, however, and protesters took to the streets in opposition to the new laws. Beginning in November, massive protests were organized and became a regular disruption, particularly in Delhi.

Modi’s policies backfired in 2021. Protests escalated (culminating in the storming of the Red Fort in January), and extraordinary restrictions and crackdowns by the government failed to suppress them. Meanwhile, despite the remarkably low spread of COVID-19 in January and February, by late April a rapid surge of cases caused by the new Delta variant had overwhelmed the country’s health care system. Modi, who had held massive political rallies ahead of state elections in March and April, was criticized for neglecting the surge. The BJP ultimately lost the election in a key battleground state despite heavy campaigning. In November, as protests continued and another set of state elections approached, Modi announced that the government would repeal the agricultural reforms.

 Return of the BJP under Narendra Modi
…it put aside concerns about Modi’s actions in the 2002 Gujarat violence and chose him to be the party’s leader in the 2014 electoral campaign. He thus became the BJP candidate for prime minister. Modi was a vigorous campaigner, touting his leadership in Gujarat that had greatly improved the state’s…
Gujarat, India
Gujarat: History of Gujarat
…government, led by Chief Minister Narendra Modi of the pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), was widely criticized for doing little to stop the killing of Muslims. Nonetheless, Modi and the BJP remained in power in Gujarat. In 2014, after the BJP had won a majority of seats in the Lok…
Maldives
Maldives: History of Maldives
…June 2019 Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited the Maldives on his first trip abroad after his re-election, signaling India’s interest in warming ties. Within the first two years of Solih’s term, India had committed more than $2 billion in aid to the Maldives, including a pledge of $500 million…
Atal Bihari Vajpayee

Born: December 25, 1924 Gwalior India
Died: August 16, 2018 (aged 93) New Delhi India
Political Affiliation: Bharatiya Janata Party

Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Bihari also spelled Behari, (born December 25, 1924, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India—died August 16, 2018, New Delhi, Delhi), leader of the pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and twice prime minister of India (1996; 1998–2004).

Vajpayee was first elected to parliament in 1957 as a member of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS), a forerunner of the BJP. In 1977 the BJS joined three other parties to form the Janata Party, which led a government that lasted until July 1979. As foreign minister in the Janata government, Vajpayee earned a reputation for improving relations with Pakistan and China. In 1980, following a split in the Janata Party, Vajpayee helped the BJS to reorganize itself as the BJP. In 1992 he was one of the few Hindu leaders to speak out against the destruction of the historic mosque at Ayodhya by anti-Muslim extremists.

Vajpayee was sworn in as prime minister in May 1996 but was in office only 13 days, after failing to attract support from other parties. In early 1998 he again became prime minister, in elections in which the BJP won a record number of seats, but he was forced to make a shaky alliance with regional parties. In 1999 the BJP increased its seats in parliament and consolidated its hold on government.

Although considered a pragmatist, Vajpayee assumed a defiant posture in the face of Western criticism of India’s testing of several nuclear weapons in 1998. He had earlier been praised for his conciliatory gestures toward India’s Muslim minority. In 2000 his government began an extensive program of divestment of public funds from several key state-run industries. In 2002 Vajpayee’s government was criticized for its slowness in reacting to riots in Gujarat in which some 1,000 people (primarily Muslims) died. Nevertheless, in 2003 Vajpayee made a concerted effort to resolve India’s long-running feud with Pakistan over the Kashmir region. Under his leadership, India achieved steady economic growth, and the country became a world leader in information technology, though the poorer elements of Indian society often felt left out of the economic prosperity. In 2004 his coalition was defeated in the parliamentary election, and he resigned from office.